Henry IV, Part I
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/henry-iv-part-1/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
KING HENRY IV, formerly Henry Bolingbroke
PRINCE HAL, Prince of Wales and heir to the throne (also called Harry and Harry Monmouth)
LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, younger son of King Henry
EARL OF WESTMORELAND
SIR WALTER BLUNT
HOTSPUR (Sir Henry, or Harry, Percy)
LADY PERCY (also called Kate)
EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND, Henry Percy, Hotspur's father
EARL OF WORCESTER, Thomas Percy, Hotspur's uncle
EDMUND MORTIMER, earl of March
LADY MORTIMER (also called "the Welsh lady")
OWEN GLENDOWER, a Welsh lord, father of Lady Mortimer
DOUGLAS (Archibald, earl of Douglas)
ARCHBISHOP (Richard Scroop, archbishop of York)
SIR MICHAEL, a priest or knight associated with the archbishop
SIR RICHARD VERNON, an English knight
SIR JOHN FALSTAFF
POINS (also called Edward, Yedward, and Ned)
BARDOLPH
PETO
GADSHILL, setter for the robbers
HOSTESS of the tavern (also called Mistress Quickly)
VINTNER, or keeper of the tavern
FRANCIS, an apprentice tapster
Carriers, Ostlers, Chamberlain, Travelers, Sheriff, Servants, Lords, Attendants, Messengers, Soldiers


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the King, Lord John of Lancaster, and the Earl
of Westmoreland, with others.]


KING
So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
To be commenced in strands afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood.
No more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flow'rets with the armed hoofs
Of hostile paces. Those opposed eyes,
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery,
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
March all one way and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred, and allies.
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
As far as to the sepulcher of Christ--
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight--
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
Whose arms were molded in their mothers' womb
To chase these pagans in those holy fields
Over whose acres walked those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go.
Therefor we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
What yesternight our council did decree
In forwarding this dear expedience.

WESTMORELAND
My liege, this haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight, when all athwart there came
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news,
Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
A thousand of his people butchered,
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
Such beastly shameless transformation
By those Welshwomen done, as may not be
Without much shame retold or spoken of.

KING
It seems then that the tidings of this broil
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.

WESTMORELAND
This matched with other did, my gracious lord.
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the north, and thus it did import:
On Holy-rood Day the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald,
That ever valiant and approved Scot,
At Holmedon met, where they did spend
A sad and bloody hour--
As by discharge of their artillery
And shape of likelihood the news was told,
For he that brought them, in the very heat
And pride of their contention did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.

KING
Here is a dear, a true-industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse,
Stained with the variation of each soil
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours,
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited;
Ten thousand bold Scots, two-and-twenty knights,
Balked in their own blood, did Sir Walter see
On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners Hotspur took
Mordake, Earl of Fife and eldest son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Atholl,
Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith.
And is not this an honorable spoil?
A gallant prize? Ha, cousin, is it not?

WESTMORELAND
In faith, it is a conquest for a prince to boast of.

KING
Yea, there thou mak'st me sad, and mak'st me sin
In envy that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the father to so blest a son,
A son who is the theme of Honor's tongue,
Amongst a grove the very straightest plant,
Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride;
Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
See riot and dishonor stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O, that it could be proved
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
In cradle-clothes our children where they lay,
And called mine "Percy," his "Plantagenet"!
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.
But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,
Of this young Percy's pride? The prisoners
Which he in this adventure hath surprised
To his own use he keeps, and sends me word
I shall have none but Mordake, Earl of Fife.

WESTMORELAND
This is his uncle's teaching. This is Worcester,
Malevolent to you in all aspects,
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of youth against your dignity.

KING
But I have sent for him to answer this.
And for this cause awhile we must neglect
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we
Will hold at Windsor. So inform the lords.
But come yourself with speed to us again,
For more is to be said and to be done
Than out of anger can be uttered.

WESTMORELAND  I will, my liege.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Prince of Wales, and Sir John Falstaff.]


FALSTAFF  Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?

PRINCE  Thou art so fat-witted with drinking of old
sack, and unbuttoning thee after supper, and
sleeping upon benches after noon, that thou hast
forgotten to demand that truly which thou wouldst
truly know. What a devil hast thou to do with
the time of the day? Unless hours were cups of
sack, and minutes capons, and clocks the tongues
of bawds, and dials the signs of leaping-houses,
and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in
flame-colored taffeta, I see no reason why thou
shouldst be so superfluous to demand the time
of the day.

FALSTAFF  Indeed, you come near me now, Hal, for we
that take purses go by the moon and the seven
stars, and not by Phoebus, he, that wand'ring
knight so fair. And I prithee, sweet wag, when thou
art king, as God save thy Grace--Majesty, I should
say, for grace thou wilt have none--

PRINCE  What, none?

FALSTAFF  No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to
be prologue to an egg and butter.

PRINCE  Well, how then? Come, roundly, roundly.

FALSTAFF  Marry then, sweet wag, when thou art king,
let not us that are squires of the night's body be
called thieves of the day's beauty. Let us be Diana's
foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the
moon, and let men say we be men of good government,
being governed, as the sea is, by our noble
and chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance
we steal.

PRINCE  Thou sayest well, and it holds well too, for the
fortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb and
flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is, by
the moon. As for proof now: a purse of gold most
resolutely snatched on Monday night and most
dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning, got with
swearing "Lay by" and spent with crying "Bring
in"; now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder,
and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the
gallows.

FALSTAFF  By the Lord, thou sayst true, lad. And is not
my hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?

PRINCE  As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle.
And is not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of
durance?

FALSTAFF  How now, how now, mad wag? What, in thy
quips and thy quiddities? What a plague have I to
do with a buff jerkin?

PRINCE  Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess
of the tavern?

FALSTAFF  Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning
many a time and oft.

PRINCE  Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?

FALSTAFF  No, I'll give thee thy due. Thou hast paid all
there.

PRINCE  Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would
stretch, and where it would not, I have used my
credit.

FALSTAFF  Yea, and so used it that were it not here
apparent that thou art heir apparent--But I prithee,
sweet wag, shall there be gallows standing in
England when thou art king? And resolution thus
fubbed as it is with the rusty curb of old father Antic
the law? Do not thou, when thou art king, hang a
thief.

PRINCE  No, thou shalt.

FALSTAFF  Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave
judge.

PRINCE  Thou judgest false already. I mean thou shalt
have the hanging of the thieves, and so become a
rare hangman.

FALSTAFF  Well, Hal, well, and in some sort it jumps
with my humor as well as waiting in the court, I
can tell you.

PRINCE  For obtaining of suits?

FALSTAFF  Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman
hath no lean wardrobe. 'Sblood, I am as
melancholy as a gib cat or a lugged bear.

PRINCE  Or an old lion, or a lover's lute.

FALSTAFF  Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.

PRINCE  What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy
of Moorditch?

FALSTAFF  Thou hast the most unsavory similes, and
art indeed the most comparative, rascaliest, sweet
young prince. But, Hal, I prithee trouble me no
more with vanity. I would to God thou and I knew
where a commodity of good names were to be
bought. An old lord of the council rated me the
other day in the street about you, sir, but I marked
him not, and yet he talked very wisely, but I
regarded him not, and yet he talked wisely, and in
the street, too.

PRINCE  Thou didst well, for wisdom cries out in the
streets and no man regards it.

FALSTAFF  O, thou hast damnable iteration, and art
indeed able to corrupt a saint. Thou hast done
much harm upon me, Hal, God forgive thee for it.
Before I knew thee, Hal, I knew nothing, and now
am I, if a man should speak truly, little better than
one of the wicked. I must give over this life, and I
will give it over. By the Lord, an I do not, I am a
villain. I'll be damned for never a king's son in
Christendom.

PRINCE  Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?

FALSTAFF  Zounds, where thou wilt, lad. I'll make one.
An I do not, call me villain and baffle me.

PRINCE  I see a good amendment of life in thee, from
praying to purse-taking.

FALSTAFF  Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal. 'Tis no sin
for a man to labor in his vocation.

[Enter Poins.]

Poins!--Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a
match. O, if men were to be saved by merit, what
hole in hell were hot enough for him? This is the
most omnipotent villain that ever cried "Stand!" to
a true man.

PRINCE  Good morrow, Ned.

POINS  Good morrow, sweet Hal.--What says Monsieur
Remorse? What says Sir John Sack-and-Sugar?
Jack, how agrees the devil and thee about
thy soul that thou soldest him on Good Friday last
for a cup of Madeira and a cold capon's leg?

PRINCE  Sir John stands to his word. The devil shall
have his bargain, for he was never yet a breaker of
proverbs. He will give the devil his due.

POINS, [to Falstaff]  Then art thou damned for keeping
thy word with the devil.

PRINCE  Else he had been damned for cozening the
devil.

POINS  But, my lads, my lads, tomorrow morning, by
four o'clock early at Gad's Hill, there are pilgrims
going to Canterbury with rich offerings, and traders
riding to London with fat purses. I have vizards for
you all. You have horses for yourselves. Gadshill lies
tonight in Rochester. I have bespoke supper tomorrow
night in Eastcheap. We may do it as secure as
sleep. If you will go, I will stuff your purses full of
crowns. If you will not, tarry at home and be
hanged.

FALSTAFF  Hear you, Yedward, if I tarry at home and
go not, I'll hang you for going.

POINS  You will, chops?

FALSTAFF  Hal, wilt thou make one?

PRINCE  Who, I rob? I a thief? Not I, by my faith.

FALSTAFF  There's neither honesty, manhood, nor
good fellowship in thee, nor thou cam'st not of
the blood royal, if thou darest not stand for ten
shillings.

PRINCE  Well then, once in my days I'll be a madcap.

FALSTAFF  Why, that's well said.

PRINCE  Well, come what will, I'll tarry at home.

FALSTAFF  By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then when thou
art king.

PRINCE  I care not.

POINS  Sir John, I prithee leave the Prince and me
alone. I will lay him down such reasons for this
adventure that he shall go.

FALSTAFF  Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion,
and him the ears of profiting, that what thou
speakest may move, and what he hears may be
believed, that the true prince may, for recreation
sake, prove a false thief, for the poor abuses of the
time want countenance. Farewell. You shall find me
in Eastcheap.

PRINCE  Farewell, thou latter spring. Farewell, Allhallown
summer.	[Falstaff exits.]

POINS  Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us
tomorrow. I have a jest to execute that I cannot
manage alone. Falstaff, Peto, Bardolph, and Gadshill
shall rob those men that we have already
waylaid. Yourself and I will not be there. And when
they have the booty, if you and I do not rob them,
cut this head off from my shoulders.

PRINCE  How shall we part with them in setting forth?

POINS  Why, we will set forth before or after them, and
appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at our
pleasure to fail; and then will they adventure upon
the exploit themselves, which they shall have no
sooner achieved but we'll set upon them.

PRINCE  Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our
horses, by our habits, and by every other appointment
to be ourselves.

POINS  Tut, our horses they shall not see; I'll tie them
in the wood. Our vizards we will change after we
leave them. And, sirrah, I have cases of buckram
for the nonce, to immask our noted outward
garments.

PRINCE  Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.

POINS  Well, for two of them, I know them to be as
true-bred cowards as ever turned back; and for the
third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I'll
forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be the
incomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue will
tell us when we meet at supper: how thirty at least
he fought with, what wards, what blows, what
extremities he endured; and in the reproof of this
lives the jest.

PRINCE  Well, I'll go with thee. Provide us all things
necessary and meet me tomorrow night in Eastcheap.
There I'll sup. Farewell.

POINS  Farewell, my lord.	[Poins exits.]

PRINCE
I know you all, and will awhile uphold
The unyoked humor of your idleness.
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That, when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wondered at
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapors that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To sport would be as tedious as to work,
But when they seldom come, they wished-for come,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
So when this loose behavior I throw off
And pay the debt I never promised,
By how much better than my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes;
And, like bright metal on a sullen ground,
My reformation, glitt'ring o'er my fault,
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I'll so offend to make offense a skill,
Redeeming time when men think least I will.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter the King, Northumberland, Worcester, Hotspur,
and Sir Walter Blunt, with others.]


KING, [to Northumberland, Worcester, and Hotspur]
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me, for accordingly
You tread upon my patience. But be sure
I will from henceforth rather be myself,
Mighty and to be feared, than my condition,
Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
And therefore lost that title of respect
Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.

WORCESTER
Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it,
And that same greatness too which our own hands
Have holp to make so portly.

NORTHUMBERLAND  My lord--

KING
Worcester, get thee gone, for I do see
Danger and disobedience in thine eye.
O sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And majesty might never yet endure
The moody frontier of a servant brow.
You have good leave to leave us. When we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
[Worcester exits.]
You were about to speak.

NORTHUMBERLAND  Yea, my good lord.
Those prisoners in your Highness' name demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
As is delivered to your Majesty.
Either envy, therefore, or misprision
Is guilty of this fault, and not my son.

HOTSPUR
My liege, I did deny no prisoners.
But I remember, when the fight was done,
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,
Came there a certain lord, neat and trimly dressed,
Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reaped
Showed like a stubble land at harvest home.
He was perfumed like a milliner,
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A pouncet box, which ever and anon
He gave his nose and took 't away again,
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in snuff; and still he smiled and talked.
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
He called them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
With many holiday and lady terms
He questioned me, amongst the rest demanded
My prisoners in your Majesty's behalf.
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
To be so pestered with a popinjay,
Out of my grief and my impatience
Answered neglectingly I know not what--
He should, or he should not; for he made me mad
To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman
Of guns, and drums, and wounds--God save the
mark!--
And telling me the sovereignest thing on Earth
Was parmacety for an inward bruise,
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villainous saltpeter should be digged
Out of the bowels of the harmless Earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroyed
So cowardly, and but for these vile guns
He would himself have been a soldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
I answered indirectly, as I said,
And I beseech you, let not his report
Come current for an accusation
Betwixt my love and your high Majesty.

BLUNT
The circumstance considered, good my lord,
Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
To such a person and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably die and never rise
To do him wrong or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.

KING
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners,
But with proviso and exception
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer,
Who, on my soul, hath willfully betrayed
The lives of those that he did lead to fight
Against that great magician, damned Glendower,
Whose daughter, as we hear, that Earl of March
Hath lately married. Shall our coffers then
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we buy treason and indent with fears
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains let him starve,
For I shall never hold that man my friend
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.

HOTSPUR  Revolted Mortimer!
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
But by the chance of war. To prove that true
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took
When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank
In single opposition hand to hand
He did confound the best part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower.
Three times they breathed, and three times did they
drink,
Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood,
Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
Blood-stained with these valiant combatants.
Never did bare and rotten policy
Color her working with such deadly wounds,
Nor never could the noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly.
Then let not him be slandered with revolt.

KING
Thou dost belie him, Percy; thou dost belie him.
He never did encounter with Glendower.
I tell thee, he durst as well have met the devil alone
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease you.--My lord Northumberland,
We license your departure with your son.--
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
[King exits with Blunt and others.]

HOTSPUR
An if the devil come and roar for them,
I will not send them. I will after straight
And tell him so, for I will ease my heart,
Albeit I make a hazard of my head.

NORTHUMBERLAND
What, drunk with choler? Stay and pause awhile.
Here comes your uncle.

[Enter Worcester.]


HOTSPUR  Speak of Mortimer?
Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soul
Want mercy if I do not join with him.
Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the downtrod Mortimer
As high in the air as this unthankful king,
As this ingrate and cankered Bolingbroke.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Brother, the King hath made your nephew mad.

WORCESTER
Who struck this heat up after I was gone?

HOTSPUR
He will forsooth have all my prisoners,
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my wife's brother, then his cheek looked pale,
And on my face he turned an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.

WORCESTER
I cannot blame him. Was not he proclaimed
By Richard, that dead is, the next of blood?

NORTHUMBERLAND
He was; I heard the proclamation.
And then it was when the unhappy king--
Whose wrongs in us God pardon!--did set forth
Upon his Irish expedition;
From whence he, intercepted, did return
To be deposed and shortly murdered.

WORCESTER
And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.

HOTSPUR
But soft, I pray you. Did King Richard then
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
Heir to the crown?

NORTHUMBERLAND  He did; myself did hear it.

HOTSPUR
Nay then, I cannot blame his cousin king
That wished him on the barren mountains starve.
But shall it be that you that set the crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Of murderous subornation--shall it be
That you a world of curses undergo,
Being the agents or base second means,
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
O, pardon me that I descend so low
To show the line and the predicament
Wherein you range under this subtle king.
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
Or fill up chronicles in time to come,
That men of your nobility and power
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
(As both of you, God pardon it, have done)
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,
And plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken
That you are fooled, discarded, and shook off
By him for whom these shames you underwent?
No, yet time serves wherein you may redeem
Your banished honors and restore yourselves
Into the good thoughts of the world again,
Revenge the jeering and disdained contempt
Of this proud king, who studies day and night
To answer all the debt he owes to you
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths.
Therefore I say--

WORCESTER  Peace, cousin, say no more.
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
And to your quick-conceiving discontents
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and adventurous spirit
As to o'erwalk a current roaring loud
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.

HOTSPUR
If he fall in, good night, or sink or swim!
Send danger from the east unto the west,
So honor cross it from the north to south,
And let them grapple. O, the blood more stirs
To rouse a lion than to start a hare!

NORTHUMBERLAND, [to Worcester]
Imagination of some great exploit
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.

HOTSPUR
By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap
To pluck bright honor from the pale-faced moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honor by the locks,
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
Without corrival all her dignities.
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!

WORCESTER
He apprehends a world of figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend.--
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.

HOTSPUR
I cry you mercy.

WORCESTER  Those same noble Scots
That are your prisoners--

HOTSPUR  I'll keep them all.
By God, he shall not have a Scot of them.
No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not.
I'll keep them, by this hand!

WORCESTER  You start away
And lend no ear unto my purposes:
Those prisoners you shall keep--

HOTSPUR  Nay, I will. That's flat!
He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
Forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer.
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his ear I'll hollo "Mortimer."
Nay, I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but "Mortimer," and give it him
To keep his anger still in motion.

WORCESTER  Hear you, cousin, a word.

HOTSPUR
All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke.
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales--
But that I think his father loves him not
And would be glad he met with some mischance--
I would have him poisoned with a pot of ale.

WORCESTER
Farewell, kinsman. I'll talk to you
When you are better tempered to attend.

NORTHUMBERLAND, [to Hotspur]
Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool
Art thou to break into this woman's mood,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!

HOTSPUR
Why, look you, I am whipped and scourged with
rods,
Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear
Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke.
In Richard's time--what do you call the place?
A plague upon it! It is in Gloucestershire.
'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept,
His uncle York, where I first bowed my knee
Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke.
'Sblood, when you and he came back from
Ravenspurgh.

NORTHUMBERLAND  At Berkeley Castle.

HOTSPUR  You say true.
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me:
"Look when his infant fortune came to age,"
And "gentle Harry Percy," and "kind cousin."
O, the devil take such cozeners!--God forgive me!
Good uncle, tell your tale. I have done.

WORCESTER
Nay, if you have not, to it again.
We will stay your leisure.

HOTSPUR  I have done, i' faith.

WORCESTER
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners:
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas' son your only mean
For powers in Scotland, which, for divers reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured
Will easily be granted.--You, my lord,
Your son in Scotland being thus employed,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble prelate well beloved,
The Archbishop.

HOTSPUR  Of York, is it not?

WORCESTER  True, who bears hard
His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.
I speak not this in estimation,
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.

HOTSPUR
I smell it. Upon my life it will do well.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Before the game is afoot thou still let'st slip.

HOTSPUR
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot.
And then the power of Scotland and of York
To join with Mortimer, ha?

WORCESTER  And so they shall.

HOTSPUR
In faith, it is exceedingly well aimed.

WORCESTER
And 'tis no little reason bids us speed
To save our heads by raising of a head,
For bear ourselves as even as we can,
The King will always think him in our debt,
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
Till he hath found a time to pay us home.
And see already how he doth begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.

HOTSPUR
He does, he does. We'll be revenged on him.

WORCESTER
Cousin, farewell. No further go in this
Than I by letters shall direct your course.
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer,
Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Farewell, good brother. We shall thrive, I trust.

HOTSPUR
Uncle, adieu. O, let the hours be short
Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter a Carrier with a lantern in his hand.]


FIRST CARRIER  Heigh-ho! An it be not four by the day,
I'll be hanged. Charles's Wain is over the new
chimney, and yet our horse not packed.--What,
ostler!

OSTLER, [within]  Anon, anon.

FIRST CARRIER  I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle. Put a
few flocks in the point. Poor jade is wrung in the
withers out of all cess.

[Enter another Carrier, with a lantern.]


SECOND CARRIER  Peas and beans are as dank here as a
dog, and that is the next way to give poor jades the
bots. This house is turned upside down since Robin
ostler died.

FIRST CARRIER  Poor fellow never joyed since the price
of oats rose. It was the death of him.

SECOND CARRIER  I think this be the most villainous
house in all London road for fleas. I am stung like a
tench.

FIRST CARRIER  Like a tench? By the Mass, there is
ne'er a king christen could be better bit than I have
been since the first cock.

SECOND CARRIER  Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan,
and then we leak in your chimney, and your
chamber-lye breeds fleas like a loach.

FIRST CARRIER  What, ostler, come away and be
hanged. Come away.

SECOND CARRIER  I have a gammon of bacon and two
races of ginger to be delivered as far as Charing
Cross.

FIRST CARRIER  God's body, the turkeys in my pannier
are quite starved.--What, ostler! A plague on thee!
Hast thou never an eye in thy head? Canst not hear?
An 'twere not as good deed as drink to break the
pate on thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be
hanged. Hast no faith in thee?

[Enter Gadshill.]


GADSHILL  Good morrow, carriers. What's o'clock?

FIRST CARRIER  I think it be two o'clock.

GADSHILL  I prithee, lend me thy lantern to see my
gelding in the stable.

FIRST CARRIER  Nay, by God, soft. I know a trick worth
two of that, i' faith.

GADSHILL, [to Second Carrier]  I pray thee, lend me
thine.

SECOND CARRIER  Ay, when, canst tell? "Lend me thy
lantern," quoth he. Marry, I'll see thee hanged
first.

GADSHILL  Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to
come to London?

SECOND CARRIER  Time enough to go to bed with a
candle, I warrant thee. Come, neighbor Mugs,
we'll call up the gentlemen. They will along with
company, for they have great charge.
[Carriers exit.]

GADSHILL  What ho, chamberlain!

[Enter Chamberlain.]


CHAMBERLAIN  At hand, quoth pickpurse.

GADSHILL  That's even as fair as "at hand, quoth the
Chamberlain," for thou variest no more from
picking of purses than giving direction doth from
laboring: thou layest the plot how.

CHAMBERLAIN  Good morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds
current that I told you yesternight: there's a franklin
in the Wild of Kent hath brought three hundred
marks with him in gold. I heard him tell it to one of
his company last night at supper--a kind of auditor,
one that hath abundance of charge too, God knows
what. They are up already and call for eggs and
butter. They will away presently.

GADSHILL  Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas'
clerks, I'll give thee this neck.

CHAMBERLAIN  No, I'll none of it. I pray thee, keep that
for the hangman, for I know thou worshipest Saint
Nicholas as truly as a man of falsehood may.

GADSHILL  What talkest thou to me of the hangman? If
I hang, I'll make a fat pair of gallows, for if I hang,
old Sir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is
no starveling. Tut, there are other Troyans that
thou dream'st not of, the which for sport sake are
content to do the profession some grace, that
would, if matters should be looked into, for their
own credit sake make all whole. I am joined with no
foot-land-rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers,
none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms,
but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters
and great oneyers, such as can hold in, such
as will strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner
than drink, and drink sooner than pray, and yet,
zounds, I lie, for they pray continually to their saint
the commonwealth, or rather not pray to her but
prey on her, for they ride up and down on her and
make her their boots.

CHAMBERLAIN  What, the commonwealth their boots?
Will she hold out water in foul way?

GADSHILL  She will, she will. Justice hath liquored her.
We steal as in a castle, cocksure. We have the
receipt of fern seed; we walk invisible.

CHAMBERLAIN  Nay, by my faith, I think you are more
beholding to the night than to fern seed for your
walking invisible.

GADSHILL  Give me thy hand. Thou shalt have a share in
our purchase, as I am a true man.

CHAMBERLAIN  Nay, rather let me have it as you are a
false thief.

GADSHILL  Go to. Homo is a common name to all men.
Bid the ostler bring my gelding out of the stable.
Farewell, you muddy knave.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Prince, Poins, Bardolph, and Peto.]


POINS  Come, shelter, shelter! I have removed Falstaff's
horse, and he frets like a gummed velvet.

PRINCE  Stand close.	[Poins, Bardolph, and Peto exit.]

[Enter Falstaff.]


FALSTAFF  Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!

PRINCE  Peace, you fat-kidneyed rascal. What a brawling
dost thou keep!

FALSTAFF  Where's Poins, Hal?

PRINCE  He is walked up to the top of the hill. I'll go
seek him.	[Prince exits.]

FALSTAFF  I am accursed to rob in that thief's company.
The rascal hath removed my horse and tied him I
know not where. If I travel but four foot by the
square further afoot, I shall break my wind. Well, I
doubt not but to die a fair death for all this, if I
'scape hanging for killing that rogue. I have forsworn
his company hourly any time this two-and-twenty
years, and yet I am bewitched with the
rogue's company. If the rascal have not given me
medicines to make me love him, I'll be hanged. It
could not be else: I have drunk medicines.--Poins!
Hal! A plague upon you both.--Bardolph! Peto!--
I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further. An 'twere not as
good a deed as drink to turn true man and to leave
these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that ever
chewed with a tooth. Eight yards of uneven ground
is threescore and ten miles afoot with me, and the
stony-hearted villains know it well enough. A plague
upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another!
[(They whistle, within.)] Whew! A plague upon you
all!

[Enter the Prince, Poins, Peto, and Bardolph.]

Give me my horse, you rogues. Give me my horse
and be hanged!

PRINCE  Peace, you fat guts! Lie down, lay thine ear
close to the ground, and list if thou canst hear the
tread of travelers.

FALSTAFF  Have you any levers to lift me up again being
down? 'Sblood, I'll not bear my own flesh so
far afoot again for all the coin in thy father's Exchequer.
What a plague mean you to colt me
thus?

PRINCE  Thou liest. Thou art not colted; thou art
uncolted.

FALSTAFF  I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my
horse, good king's son.

PRINCE  Out, you rogue! Shall I be your ostler?

FALSTAFF  Hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent
garters! If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this. An I have
not ballads made on you all and sung to filthy
tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison--when a jest
is so forward, and afoot too! I hate it.

[Enter Gadshill.]


GADSHILL  Stand.

FALSTAFF  So I do, against my will.

POINS  O, 'tis our setter. I know his voice.

BARDOLPH  What news?

GADSHILL  Case you, case you. On with your vizards.
There's money of the King's coming down the hill.
'Tis going to the King's Exchequer.

FALSTAFF  You lie, you rogue. 'Tis going to the King's
Tavern.

GADSHILL  There's enough to make us all.

FALSTAFF  To be hanged.

PRINCE  Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow
lane. Ned Poins and I will walk lower. If they 'scape
from your encounter, then they light on us.

PETO  How many be there of them?

GADSHILL  Some eight or ten.

FALSTAFF  Zounds, will they not rob us?

PRINCE  What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?

FALSTAFF  Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather,
but yet no coward, Hal.

PRINCE  Well, we leave that to the proof.

POINS  Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge.
When thou need'st him, there thou shalt find him.
Farewell and stand fast.

FALSTAFF  Now cannot I strike him, if I should be
hanged.

PRINCE, [aside to Poins]  Ned, where are our disguises?

POINS, [aside to Prince]  Here, hard by. Stand close.
[The Prince and Poins exit.]

FALSTAFF  Now, my masters, happy man be his dole,
say I. Every man to his business.
[They step aside.]

[Enter the Travelers.]


FIRST TRAVELER  Come, neighbor, the boy shall lead
our horses down the hill. We'll walk afoot awhile
and ease our legs.

THIEVES, [advancing]  Stand!

TRAVELERS  Jesus bless us!

FALSTAFF  Strike! Down with them! Cut the villains'
throats! Ah, whoreson caterpillars, bacon-fed
knaves, they hate us youth. Down with them!
Fleece them!

TRAVELERS  O, we are undone, both we and ours
forever!

FALSTAFF  Hang, you gorbellied knaves! Are you undone?
No, you fat chuffs. I would your store were
here. On, bacons, on! What, you knaves, young men
must live. You are grandjurors, are you? We'll jure
you, faith.
[Here they rob them and bind them. They all exit.]

[Enter the Prince and Poins, disguised.]


PRINCE  The thieves have bound the true men. Now
could thou and I rob the thieves and go merrily to
London, it would be argument for a week, laughter
for a month, and a good jest forever.

POINS  Stand close, I hear them coming.
[They step aside.]

[Enter the Thieves again.]


FALSTAFF  Come, my masters, let us share, and then to
horse before day. An the Prince and Poins be not
two arrant cowards, there's no equity stirring.
There's no more valor in that Poins than in a wild
duck.
[As they are sharing, the Prince
and Poins set upon them.]

PRINCE  Your money!

POINS  Villains!
[They all run away, and Falstaff, after a blow or two,
runs away too, leaving the booty behind them.]

PRINCE
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse.
The thieves are all scattered, and possessed with
fear
So strongly that they dare not meet each other.
Each takes his fellow for an officer.
Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along.
Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him.

POINS  How the fat rogue roared!
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Hotspur alone, reading a letter.]


HOTSPUR  But, for mine own part, my lord, I could be
well contented to be there, in respect of the love I
bear your house. He could be contented; why is he
not, then? In respect of the love he bears our
house--he shows in this he loves his own barn
better than he loves our house. Let me see some
more. The purpose you undertake is dangerous.
Why, that's certain. 'Tis dangerous to take a cold,
to sleep, to drink; but I tell you, my Lord Fool, out
of this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety.
The purpose you undertake is dangerous, the friends
you have named uncertain, the time itself unsorted,
and your whole plot too light for the counterpoise
of so great an opposition. Say you so, say you so?
I say unto you again, you are a shallow, cowardly
hind, and you lie. What a lack-brain is this! By
the Lord, our plot is a good plot as ever was laid,
our friends true and constant--a good plot,
good friends, and full of expectation; an excellent
plot, very good friends. What a frosty-spirited
rogue is this! Why, my Lord of York commends
the plot and the general course of the action.
Zounds, an I were now by this rascal, I could brain
him with his lady's fan. Is there not my father, my
uncle, and myself, Lord Edmund Mortimer, my
Lord of York, and Owen Glendower? Is there not
besides the Douglas? Have I not all their letters to
meet me in arms by the ninth of the next month,
and are they not some of them set forward already?
What a pagan rascal is this--an infidel! Ha, you
shall see now, in very sincerity of fear and cold
heart, will he to the King and lay open all our
proceedings. O, I could divide myself and go to
buffets for moving such a dish of skim milk with so
honorable an action! Hang him, let him tell the
King. We are prepared. I will set forward tonight.

[Enter his Lady.]

How now, Kate? I must leave you within these two
hours.

LADY PERCY
O my good lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offense have I this fortnight been
A banished woman from my Harry's bed?
Tell me, sweet lord, what is 't that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth
And start so often when thou sit'st alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks
And given my treasures and my rights of thee
To thick-eyed musing and curst melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watched,
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
Cry "Courage! To the field!" And thou hast talked
Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,
Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,
Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,
Of prisoners' ransom, and of soldiers slain,
And all the currents of a heady fight.
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war,
And thus hath so bestirred thee in thy sleep,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream,
And in thy face strange motions have appeared,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath
On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are
these?
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
And I must know it, else he loves me not.

HOTSPUR
What, ho!

[Enter a Servant.]

Is Gilliams with the packet gone?

SERVANT  He is, my lord, an hour ago.

HOTSPUR
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?

SERVANT
One horse, my lord, he brought even now.

HOTSPUR
What horse? A roan, a crop-ear, is it not?

SERVANT
It is, my lord.

HOTSPUR  That roan shall be my throne.
Well, I will back him straight. O, Esperance!
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
[Servant exits.]

LADY PERCY  But hear you, my lord.

HOTSPUR  What say'st thou, my lady?

LADY PERCY  What is it carries you away?

HOTSPUR  Why, my horse, my love, my horse.

LADY PERCY  Out, you mad-headed ape!
A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen
As you are tossed with. In faith,
I'll know your business, Harry, that I will.
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir
About his title, and hath sent for you
To line his enterprise; but if you go--

HOTSPUR
So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.

LADY PERCY
Come, come, you paraquito, answer me
Directly unto this question that I ask.
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,
An if thou wilt not tell me all things true.

HOTSPUR  Away!
Away, you trifler. Love, I love thee not.
I care not for thee, Kate. This is no world
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips.
We must have bloody noses and cracked crowns,
And pass them current too.--Gods me, my horse!--
What say'st thou, Kate? What wouldst thou have
with me?

LADY PERCY
Do you not love me? Do you not indeed?
Well, do not then, for since you love me not,
I will not love myself. Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.

HOTSPUR  Come, wilt thou see me ride?
And when I am a-horseback I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate,
I must not have you henceforth question me
Whither I go, nor reason whereabout.
Whither I must, I must; and to conclude
This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise
Than Harry Percy's wife; constant you are,
But yet a woman; and for secrecy
No lady closer, for I well believe
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.

LADY PERCY  How? So far?

HOTSPUR
Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate,
Whither I go, thither shall you go too.
Today will I set forth, tomorrow you.
Will this content you, Kate?

LADY PERCY  It must, of force.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Prince and Poins.]


PRINCE  Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room and
lend me thy hand to laugh a little.

POINS  Where hast been, Hal?

PRINCE  With three or four loggerheads amongst three
or fourscore hogsheads. I have sounded the very
bass string of humility. Sirrah, I am sworn brother
to a leash of drawers, and can call them all by their
Christian names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis. They
take it already upon their salvation that though I be
but Prince of Wales, yet I am the king of courtesy,
and tell me flatly I am no proud jack, like Falstaff,
but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a good boy--by
the Lord, so they call me--and when I am king of
England, I shall command all the good lads in
Eastcheap. They call drinking deep "dyeing scarlet,"
and when you breathe in your watering, they
cry "Hem!" and bid you "Play it off!" To conclude, I
am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour
that I can drink with any tinker in his own language
during my life. I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lost much
honor that thou wert not with me in this action; but,
sweet Ned--to sweeten which name of Ned, I give
thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapped even now
into my hand by an underskinker, one that never
spake other English in his life than "Eight shillings
and sixpence," and "You are welcome," with this
shrill addition, "Anon, anon, sir.--Score a pint of
bastard in the Half-moon," or so. But, Ned, to
drive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee, do
thou stand in some by-room while I question my
puny drawer to what end he gave me the sugar, and
do thou never leave calling "Francis," that his tale
to me may be nothing but "Anon." Step aside, and
I'll show thee a precedent.	[Poins exits.]

POINS, [within]  Francis!

PRINCE  Thou art perfect.

POINS, [within]  Francis!

[Enter Francis, the Drawer.]


FRANCIS  Anon, anon, sir.--Look down into the Pomgarnet,
Ralph.

PRINCE  Come hither, Francis.

FRANCIS  My lord?

PRINCE  How long hast thou to serve, Francis?

FRANCIS  Forsooth, five years, and as much as to--

POINS, [within]  Francis!

FRANCIS  Anon, anon, sir.

PRINCE  Five year! By 'r Lady, a long lease for the
clinking of pewter! But, Francis, darest thou be
so valiant as to play the coward with thy indenture,
and show it a fair pair of heels, and run
from it?

FRANCIS  O Lord, sir, I'll be sworn upon all the books
in England, I could find in my heart--

POINS, [within]  Francis!

FRANCIS  Anon, sir.

PRINCE  How old art thou, Francis?

FRANCIS  Let me see. About Michaelmas next, I shall
be--

POINS, [within]  Francis!

FRANCIS  Anon, sir.--Pray, stay a little, my lord.

PRINCE  Nay, but hark you, Francis, for the sugar thou
gavest me--'twas a pennyworth, was 't not?

FRANCIS  O Lord, I would it had been two!

PRINCE  I will give thee for it a thousand pound. Ask
me when thou wilt, and thou shalt have it.

POINS, [within]  Francis!

FRANCIS  Anon, anon.

PRINCE  Anon, Francis? No, Francis. But tomorrow,
Francis; or, Francis, o' Thursday; or indeed, Francis,
when thou wilt. But, Francis--

FRANCIS  My lord?

PRINCE  Wilt thou rob this leathern-jerkin, crystal-button,
not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter,
smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch--

FRANCIS  O Lord, sir, who do you mean?

PRINCE  Why then, your brown bastard is your only
drink, for look you, Francis, your white canvas
doublet will sully. In Barbary, sir, it cannot come to
so much.

FRANCIS  What, sir?

POINS, [within]  Francis!

PRINCE  Away, you rogue! Dost thou not hear them
call?
[Here they both call him. The Drawer stands amazed,
not knowing which way to go.]

[Enter Vintner.]


VINTNER  What, stand'st thou still and hear'st such a
calling? Look to the guests within. [Francis exits.]
My lord, old Sir John with half a dozen more are at
the door. Shall I let them in?

PRINCE  Let them alone awhile, and then open the
door. [Vintner exits.] Poins!

[Enter Poins.]


POINS  Anon, anon, sir.

PRINCE  Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are
at the door. Shall we be merry?

POINS  As merry as crickets, my lad. But hark you,
what cunning match have you made with this jest
of the drawer. Come, what's the issue?

PRINCE  I am now of all humors that have showed
themselves humors since the old days of Goodman
Adam to the pupil age of this present twelve
o'clock at midnight.

[Enter Francis, in haste.]

What's o'clock, Francis?

FRANCIS  Anon, anon, sir.	[Francis exits.]

PRINCE  That ever this fellow should have fewer words
than a parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His
industry is upstairs and downstairs, his eloquence
the parcel of a reckoning. I am not yet of Percy's
mind, the Hotspur of the north, he that kills me
some six or seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast,
washes his hands, and says to his wife "Fie upon
this quiet life! I want work." "O my sweet Harry,"
says she, "how many hast thou killed today?"
"Give my roan horse a drench," says he, and answers
"Some fourteen," an hour after. "A trifle, a
trifle." I prithee, call in Falstaff. I'll play Percy,
and that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer
his wife. "Rivo!" says the drunkard. Call in
Ribs, call in Tallow.

[Enter Falstaff, Gadshill, Peto, Bardolph;
and Francis, with wine.]


POINS  Welcome, Jack. Where hast thou been?

FALSTAFF  A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance
too! Marry and amen!--Give me a cup of
sack, boy.--Ere I lead this life long, I'll sew netherstocks
and mend them, and foot them too. A plague
of all cowards!--Give me a cup of sack, rogue!--Is
there no virtue extant?	[He drinketh.]

PRINCE  Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of
butter--pitiful-hearted Titan!--that melted at the
sweet tale of the sun's? If thou didst, then behold
that compound.

FALSTAFF, [to Francis]  You rogue, here's lime in this
sack too.--There is nothing but roguery to be
found in villainous man, yet a coward is worse than
a cup of sack with lime in it. A villainous coward! Go
thy ways, old Jack. Die when thou wilt. If manhood,
good manhood, be not forgot upon the face of the
Earth, then am I a shotten herring. There lives not
three good men unhanged in England, and one of
them is fat and grows old, God help the while. A bad
world, I say. I would I were a weaver. I could sing
psalms, or anything. A plague of all cowards, I say
still.

PRINCE  How now, woolsack, what mutter you?

FALSTAFF  A king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thy
kingdom with a dagger of lath, and drive all thy
subjects afore thee like a flock of wild geese, I'll
never wear hair on my face more. You, Prince of
Wales!

PRINCE  Why, you whoreson round man, what's the
matter?

FALSTAFF  Are not you a coward? Answer me to that--
and Poins there?

POINS  Zounds, you fat paunch, an you call me coward,
by the Lord, I'll stab thee.

FALSTAFF  I call thee coward? I'll see thee damned ere
I call thee coward, but I would give a thousand
pound I could run as fast as thou canst. You are
straight enough in the shoulders you care not who
sees your back. Call you that backing of your
friends? A plague upon such backing! Give me them
that will face me.--Give me a cup of sack.--I am a
rogue if I drunk today.

PRINCE  O villain, thy lips are scarce wiped since thou
drunk'st last.

FALSTAFF  All is one for that. [(He drinketh.)] A plague of
all cowards, still say I.

PRINCE  What's the matter?

FALSTAFF  What's the matter? There be four of us here
have ta'en a thousand pound this day morning.

PRINCE  Where is it, Jack, where is it?

FALSTAFF  Where is it? Taken from us it is. A hundred
upon poor four of us.

PRINCE  What, a hundred, man?

FALSTAFF  I am a rogue if I were not at half-sword
with a dozen of them two hours together. I have
'scaped by miracle. I am eight times thrust through
the doublet, four through the hose, my buckler
cut through and through, my sword hacked like
a handsaw. Ecce signum! I never dealt better since
I was a man. All would not do. A plague of
all cowards! Let them speak. [Pointing to Gadshill,
Bardolph, and Peto.] If they speak more or
less than truth, they are villains, and the sons of
darkness.

PRINCE  Speak, sirs, how was it?

BARDOLPH  We four set upon some dozen.

FALSTAFF  Sixteen at least, my lord.

BARDOLPH  And bound them.

PETO  No, no, they were not bound.

FALSTAFF  You rogue, they were bound, every man of
them, or I am a Jew else, an Ebrew Jew.

BARDOLPH  As we were sharing, some six or seven
fresh men set upon us.

FALSTAFF  And unbound the rest, and then come in the
other.

PRINCE  What, fought you with them all?

FALSTAFF  All? I know not what you call all, but if I
fought not with fifty of them I am a bunch of
radish. If there were not two- or three-and-fifty
upon poor old Jack, then am I no two-legged
creature.

PRINCE  Pray God you have not murdered some of
them.

FALSTAFF  Nay, that's past praying for. I have peppered
two of them. Two I am sure I have paid, two rogues
in buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell thee a
lie, spit in my face, call me horse. Thou knowest my
old ward. Here I lay, and thus I bore my point. Four
rogues in buckram let drive at me.

PRINCE  What, four? Thou said'st but two even now.

FALSTAFF  Four, Hal, I told thee four.

POINS  Ay, ay, he said four.

FALSTAFF  These four came all afront, and mainly
thrust at me. I made me no more ado, but took all
their seven points in my target, thus.

PRINCE  Seven? Why there were but four even now.

FALSTAFF  In buckram?

POINS  Ay, four in buckram suits.

FALSTAFF  Seven by these hilts, or I am a villain else.

PRINCE, [to Poins]  Prithee, let him alone. We shall have
more anon.

FALSTAFF  Dost thou hear me, Hal?

PRINCE  Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.

FALSTAFF  Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These
nine in buckram that I told thee of--

PRINCE  So, two more already.

FALSTAFF  Their points being broken--

POINS  Down fell their hose.

FALSTAFF  Began to give me ground, but I followed me
close, came in foot and hand, and, with a thought,
seven of the eleven I paid.

PRINCE  O monstrous! Eleven buckram men grown out
of two!

FALSTAFF  But as the devil would have it, three misbegotten
knaves in Kendal green came at my back,
and let drive at me, for it was so dark, Hal, that thou
couldst not see thy hand.

PRINCE  These lies are like their father that begets
them, gross as a mountain, open, palpable. Why,
thou claybrained guts, thou knotty-pated fool, thou
whoreson, obscene, greasy tallow-catch--

FALSTAFF  What, art thou mad? Art thou mad? Is not
the truth the truth?

PRINCE  Why, how couldst thou know these men in
Kendal green when it was so dark thou couldst not
see thy hand? Come, tell us your reason. What sayest
thou to this?

POINS  Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.

FALSTAFF  What, upon compulsion? Zounds, an I were
at the strappado or all the racks in the world, I
would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a
reason on compulsion? If reasons were as plentiful
as blackberries, I would give no man a reason upon
compulsion, I.

PRINCE  I'll be no longer guilty of this sin. This sanguine
coward, this bed-presser, this horse-backbreaker,
this huge hill of flesh--

FALSTAFF  'Sblood, you starveling, you elfskin, you
dried neat's tongue, you bull's pizzle, you stockfish!
O, for breath to utter what is like thee! You tailor's
yard, you sheath, you bowcase, you vile standing
tuck--

PRINCE  Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again, and
when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons,
hear me speak but this.

POINS  Mark, Jack.

PRINCE  We two saw you four set on four, and bound
them and were masters of their wealth. Mark now
how a plain tale shall put you down. Then did we
two set on you four and, with a word, outfaced you
from your prize, and have it, yea, and can show it
you here in the house. And, Falstaff, you carried
your guts away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity,
and roared for mercy, and still run and roared, as
ever I heard bull-calf. What a slave art thou to hack
thy sword as thou hast done, and then say it was in
fight! What trick, what device, what starting-hole
canst thou now find out to hide thee from this open
and apparent shame?

POINS  Come, let's hear, Jack. What trick hast thou
now?

FALSTAFF  By the Lord, I knew you as well as he that
made you. Why, hear you, my masters, was it for
me to kill the heir apparent? Should I turn upon the
true prince? Why, thou knowest I am as valiant as
Hercules, but beware instinct. The lion will not
touch the true prince. Instinct is a great matter.
I was now a coward on instinct. I shall think
the better of myself, and thee, during my life--
I for a valiant lion, and thou for a true prince.
But, by the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the
money.--Hostess, clap to the doors.--Watch tonight,
pray tomorrow. Gallants, lads, boys, hearts
of gold, all the titles of good fellowship come to
you. What, shall we be merry? Shall we have a play
extempore?

PRINCE  Content, and the argument shall be thy running
away.

FALSTAFF  Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me.

[Enter Hostess.]


HOSTESS  O Jesu, my lord the Prince--

PRINCE  How now, my lady the hostess, what sayst thou
to me?

HOSTESS  Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the
court at door would speak with you. He says he
comes from your father.

PRINCE  Give him as much as will make him a royal
man and send him back again to my mother.

FALSTAFF  What manner of man is he?

HOSTESS  An old man.

FALSTAFF  What doth Gravity out of his bed at midnight?
Shall I give him his answer?

PRINCE  Prithee do, Jack.

FALSTAFF  Faith, and I'll send him packing.	[He exits.]

PRINCE  Now, sirs. [To Gadshill.] By 'r Lady, you fought
fair.--So did you, Peto.--So did you, Bardolph.--
You are lions too. You ran away upon instinct. You
will not touch the true prince. No, fie!

BARDOLPH  Faith, I ran when I saw others run.

PRINCE  Faith, tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaff's
sword so hacked?

PETO  Why, he hacked it with his dagger and said he
would swear truth out of England but he would
make you believe it was done in fight, and persuaded
us to do the like.

BARDOLPH  Yea, and to tickle our noses with speargrass
to make them bleed, and then to beslubber our
garments with it, and swear it was the blood of true
men. I did that I did not this seven year before: I
blushed to hear his monstrous devices.

PRINCE  O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen
years ago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever
since thou hast blushed extempore. Thou hadst fire
and sword on thy side, and yet thou ran'st away.
What instinct hadst thou for it?

BARDOLPH  My lord, do you see these meteors? Do you
behold these exhalations?

PRINCE  I do.

BARDOLPH  What think you they portend?

PRINCE  Hot livers and cold purses.

BARDOLPH  Choler, my lord, if rightly taken.

PRINCE  No. If rightly taken, halter.

[Enter Falstaff.]

Here comes lean Jack. Here comes bare-bone.--
How now, my sweet creature of bombast? How long
is 't ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?

FALSTAFF  My own knee? When I was about thy years,
Hal, I was not an eagle's talon in the waist. I could
have crept into any alderman's thumb-ring. A
plague of sighing and grief! It blows a man up like a
bladder. There's villainous news abroad. Here was
Sir John Bracy from your father. You must to the
court in the morning. That same mad fellow of the
north, Percy, and he of Wales that gave Amamon the
bastinado, and made Lucifer cuckold, and swore
the devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a
Welsh hook--what a plague call you him?

POINS  Owen Glendower.

FALSTAFF  Owen, Owen, the same, and his son-in-law
Mortimer, and old Northumberland, and that
sprightly Scot of Scots, Douglas, that runs a-horseback
up a hill perpendicular--

PRINCE  He that rides at high speed, and with his pistol
kills a sparrow flying.

FALSTAFF  You have hit it.

PRINCE  So did he never the sparrow.

FALSTAFF  Well, that rascal hath good mettle in him. He
will not run.

PRINCE  Why, what a rascal art thou then to praise him
so for running?

FALSTAFF  A-horseback, you cuckoo, but afoot he will
not budge a foot.

PRINCE  Yes, Jack, upon instinct.

FALSTAFF  I grant you, upon instinct. Well, he is there
too, and one Mordake, and a thousand blue-caps
more. Worcester is stolen away tonight. Thy father's
beard is turned white with the news. You may buy
land now as cheap as stinking mackerel.

PRINCE  Why then, it is like if there come a hot June,
and this civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads
as they buy hobnails, by the hundreds.

FALSTAFF  By the Mass, thou sayest true. It is like we
shall have good trading that way. But tell me, Hal,
art not thou horrible afeard? Thou being heir
apparent, could the world pick thee out three such
enemies again as that fiend Douglas, that spirit
Percy, and that devil Glendower? Art thou not
horribly afraid? Doth not thy blood thrill at it?

PRINCE  Not a whit, i' faith. I lack some of thy instinct.

FALSTAFF  Well, thou wilt be horribly chid tomorrow
when thou comest to thy father. If thou love me,
practice an answer.

PRINCE  Do thou stand for my father and examine me
upon the particulars of my life.

FALSTAFF  Shall I? Content. [He sits down.] This chair
shall be my state, this dagger my scepter, and this
cushion my crown.

PRINCE  Thy state is taken for a joined stool, thy golden
scepter for a leaden dagger, and thy precious rich
crown for a pitiful bald crown.

FALSTAFF  Well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of
thee, now shalt thou be moved.--Give me a cup of
sack to make my eyes look red, that it may be
thought I have wept, for I must speak in passion,
and I will do it in King Cambyses' vein.

PRINCE, [bowing]  Well, here is my leg.

FALSTAFF  And here is my speech. [As King.] Stand
aside, nobility.

HOSTESS  O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!

FALSTAFF, [as King]
Weep not, sweet queen, for trickling tears are vain.

HOSTESS  O the Father, how he holds his countenance!

FALSTAFF, [as King]
For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen,
For tears do stop the floodgates of her eyes.

HOSTESS  O Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry
players as ever I see.

FALSTAFF  Peace, good pint-pot. Peace, good tickle-brain.--
[As King.] Harry, I do not only marvel
where thou spendest thy time, but also how thou
art accompanied. For though the camomile, the
more it is trodden on, the faster it grows, so youth,
the more it is wasted, the sooner it wears. That
thou art my son I have partly thy mother's word,
partly my own opinion, but chiefly a villainous
trick of thine eye and a foolish hanging of thy
nether lip that doth warrant me. If then thou be
son to me, here lies the point: why, being son to
me, art thou so pointed at? Shall the blessed sun of
heaven prove a micher and eat blackberries? A
question not to be asked. Shall the son of England
prove a thief and take purses? A question to be
asked. There is a thing, Harry, which thou hast
often heard of, and it is known to many in our land
by the name of pitch. This pitch, as ancient writers
do report, doth defile; so doth the company thou
keepest. For, Harry, now I do not speak to thee in
drink, but in tears; not in pleasure, but in passion;
not in words only, but in woes also. And yet there is
a virtuous man whom I have often noted in thy
company, but I know not his name.

PRINCE  What manner of man, an it like your Majesty?

FALSTAFF, [as King]  A goodly portly man, i' faith, and a
corpulent; of a cheerful look, a pleasing eye, and a
most noble carriage, and, as I think, his age some
fifty, or, by 'r Lady, inclining to threescore; and now
I remember me, his name is Falstaff. If that man
should be lewdly given, he deceiveth me, for, Harry,
I see virtue in his looks. If then the tree may be
known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then
peremptorily I speak it: there is virtue in that
Falstaff; him keep with, the rest banish. And tell me
now, thou naughty varlet, tell me where hast thou
been this month?

PRINCE  Dost thou speak like a king? Do thou stand for
me, and I'll play my father.

FALSTAFF, [rising]  Depose me? If thou dost it half so
gravely, so majestically, both in word and matter,
hang me up by the heels for a rabbit-sucker or a
poulter's hare.

PRINCE, [sitting down]  Well, here I am set.

FALSTAFF  And here I stand.--Judge, my masters.

PRINCE, [as King]  Now, Harry, whence come you?

FALSTAFF, [as Prince]  My noble lord, from Eastcheap.

PRINCE, [as King]  The complaints I hear of thee are
grievous.

FALSTAFF, [as Prince]  'Sblood, my lord, they are false.
--Nay, I'll tickle you for a young prince, i' faith.

PRINCE, [as King]  Swearest thou? Ungracious boy,
henceforth ne'er look on me. Thou art violently
carried away from grace. There is a devil haunts
thee in the likeness of an old fat man. A tun of man
is thy companion. Why dost thou converse with that
trunk of humors, that bolting-hutch of beastliness,
that swollen parcel of dropsies, that huge bombard
of sack, that stuffed cloakbag of guts, that roasted
Manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly, that
reverend Vice, that gray iniquity, that father ruffian,
that vanity in years? Wherein is he good, but to taste
sack and drink it? Wherein neat and cleanly but to
carve a capon and eat it? Wherein cunning but in
craft? Wherein crafty but in villainy? Wherein villainous
but in all things? Wherein worthy but in
nothing?

FALSTAFF, [as Prince]  I would your Grace would take
me with you. Whom means your Grace?

PRINCE, [as King]  That villainous abominable misleader
of youth, Falstaff, that old white-bearded Satan.

FALSTAFF, [as Prince]  My lord, the man I know.

PRINCE, [as King]  I know thou dost.

FALSTAFF, [as Prince]  But to say I know more harm in
him than in myself were to say more than I know.
That he is old, the more the pity; his white hairs do
witness it. But that he is, saving your reverence, a
whoremaster, that I utterly deny. If sack and sugar
be a fault, God help the wicked. If to be old and
merry be a sin, then many an old host that I know is
damned. If to be fat be to be hated, then Pharaoh's
lean kine are to be loved. No, my good lord,
banish Peto, banish Bardolph, banish Poins, but for
sweet Jack Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack
Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore more
valiant being as he is old Jack Falstaff, banish not
him thy Harry's company, banish not him thy
Harry's company. Banish plump Jack, and banish
all the world.

PRINCE  I do, I will.
[A loud knocking, and Bardolph, Hostess, and
Francis exit.]

[Enter Bardolph running.]


BARDOLPH  O my lord, my lord, the Sheriff with a most
monstrous watch is at the door.

FALSTAFF  Out, you rogue.--Play out the play. I have
much to say in the behalf of that Falstaff.

[Enter the Hostess.]


HOSTESS  O Jesu, my lord, my lord--

PRINCE  Heigh, heigh, the devil rides upon a fiddlestick.
What's the matter?

HOSTESS  The Sheriff and all the watch are at the door.
They are come to search the house. Shall I let them
in?

FALSTAFF  Dost thou hear, Hal? Never call a true piece
of gold a counterfeit. Thou art essentially made
without seeming so.

PRINCE  And thou a natural coward without instinct.

FALSTAFF  I deny your major. If you will deny the
Sheriff, so; if not, let him enter. If I become not a
cart as well as another man, a plague on my
bringing up. I hope I shall as soon be strangled with
a halter as another.

PRINCE, [standing]  Go hide thee behind the arras. The
rest walk up above.--Now, my masters, for a true
face and good conscience.

FALSTAFF  Both which I have had, but their date is out;
and therefore I'll hide me.	[He hides.]

PRINCE  Call in the Sheriff.
[All but the Prince and Peto exit.]

[Enter Sheriff and the Carrier.]


PRINCE
Now, Master Sheriff, what is your will with me?

SHERIFF
First pardon me, my lord. A hue and cry
Hath followed certain men unto this house.

PRINCE  What men?

SHERIFF
One of them is well known, my gracious lord.
A gross fat man.

CARRIER  As fat as butter.

PRINCE
The man I do assure you is not here,
For I myself at this time have employed him.
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
That I will by tomorrow dinner time
Send him to answer thee or any man
For anything he shall be charged withal.
And so let me entreat you leave the house.

SHERIFF
I will, my lord. There are two gentlemen
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.

PRINCE
It may be so. If he have robbed these men,
He shall be answerable; and so farewell.

SHERIFF  Good night, my noble lord.

PRINCE
I think it is good morrow, is it not?

SHERIFF
Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.
[He exits with the Carrier.]

PRINCE  This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's. Go
call him forth.

PETO  Falstaff!--Fast asleep behind the arras, and
snorting like a horse.

PRINCE  Hark, how hard he fetches breath. Search his
pockets. [(He searcheth his pocket, and findeth certain
papers.)] What hast thou found?

PETO  Nothing but papers, my lord.

PRINCE  Let's see what they be. Read them.

PETO [reads]
Item, a capon,...2s. 2d.
Item, sauce,...4d.
Item, sack, two gallons,...5s. 8d.
Item, anchovies and sack after supper,...2s. 6d.
Item, bread,...ob.

PRINCE  O monstrous! But one halfpennyworth of
bread to this intolerable deal of sack? What there is
else, keep close. We'll read it at more advantage.
There let him sleep till day. I'll to the court in the
morning. We must all to the wars, and thy place
shall be honorable. I'll procure this fat rogue a
charge of foot, and I know his death will be a march
of twelve score. The money shall be paid back again
with advantage. Be with me betimes in the morning,
and so good morrow, Peto.

PETO  Good morrow, good my lord.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Hotspur, Worcester, Lord Mortimer, and Owen
Glendower.]


MORTIMER
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
And our induction full of prosperous hope.

HOTSPUR
Lord Mortimer and cousin Glendower,
Will you sit down? And uncle Worcester--
A plague upon it, I have forgot the map.

GLENDOWER
No, here it is. Sit, cousin Percy,
Sit, good cousin Hotspur, for by that name
As oft as Lancaster doth speak of you
His cheek looks pale, and with a rising sigh
He wisheth you in heaven.

HOTSPUR  And you in hell,
As oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.

GLENDOWER
I cannot blame him. At my nativity
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
Of burning cressets, and at my birth
The frame and huge foundation of the Earth
Shaked like a coward.

HOTSPUR  Why, so it would have done
At the same season if your mother's cat
Had but kittened, though yourself had never been
born.

GLENDOWER
I say the Earth did shake when I was born.

HOTSPUR
And I say the Earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.

GLENDOWER
The heavens were all on fire; the Earth did tremble.

HOTSPUR
O, then the Earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity.
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions; oft the teeming Earth
Is with a kind of colic pinched and vexed
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within her womb, which, for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old beldam Earth and topples down
Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth
Our grandam Earth, having this distemp'rature,
In passion shook.

GLENDOWER  Cousin, of many men
I do not bear these crossings. Give me leave
To tell you once again that at my birth
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my life do show
I am not in the roll of common men.
Where is he living, clipped in with the sea
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
Which calls me pupil or hath read to me?
And bring him out that is but woman's son
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art
And hold me pace in deep experiments.

HOTSPUR
I think there's no man speaks better Welsh.
I'll to dinner.

MORTIMER
Peace, cousin Percy. You will make him mad.

GLENDOWER
I can call spirits from the vasty deep.

HOTSPUR
Why, so can I, or so can any man,
But will they come when you do call for them?

GLENDOWER
Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command the
devil.

HOTSPUR
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth. Tell truth and shame the devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him
hence.
O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!

MORTIMER
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.

GLENDOWER
Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head
Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye
And sandy-bottomed Severn have I sent him
Bootless home and weather-beaten back.

HOTSPUR
Home without boots, and in foul weather too!
How 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?

GLENDOWER
Come, here is the map. Shall we divide our right
According to our threefold order ta'en?

MORTIMER
The Archdeacon hath divided it
Into three limits very equally:
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
By south and east is to my part assigned;
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
And all the fertile land within that bound
To Owen Glendower; and, dear coz, to you
The remnant northward lying off from Trent.
And our indentures tripartite are drawn,
Which being sealed interchangeably--
A business that this night may execute--
Tomorrow, cousin Percy, you and I
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days.
[To Glendower.] Within that space you may have
drawn together
Your tenants, friends, and neighboring gentlemen.

GLENDOWER
A shorter time shall send me to you, lords,
And in my conduct shall your ladies come,
From whom you now must steal and take no leave,
For there will be a world of water shed
Upon the parting of your wives and you.

HOTSPUR, [looking at the map]
Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours.
See how this river comes me cranking in
And cuts me from the best of all my land
A huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out.
I'll have the current in this place dammed up,
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
In a new channel, fair and evenly.
It shall not wind with such a deep indent
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.

GLENDOWER
Not wind? It shall, it must. You see it doth.

MORTIMER, [to Hotspur]
Yea, but mark how he bears his course, and runs
me up
With like advantage on the other side,
Gelding the opposed continent as much
As on the other side it takes from you.

WORCESTER
Yea, but a little charge will trench him here
And on this north side win this cape of land,
And then he runs straight and even.

HOTSPUR
I'll have it so. A little charge will do it.

GLENDOWER  I'll not have it altered.

HOTSPUR  Will not you?

GLENDOWER  No, nor you shall not.

HOTSPUR  Who shall say me nay?

GLENDOWER  Why, that will I.

HOTSPUR
Let me not understand you, then; speak it in Welsh.

GLENDOWER
I can speak English, lord, as well as you,
For I was trained up in the English court,
Where being but young I framed to the harp
Many an English ditty lovely well
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament--
A virtue that was never seen in you.

HOTSPUR
Marry, and I am glad of it with all my heart.
I had rather be a kitten and cry "mew"
Than one of these same meter balladmongers.
I had rather hear a brazen can'stick turned,
Or a dry wheel grate on the axletree,
And that would set my teeth nothing an edge,
Nothing so much as mincing poetry.
'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.

GLENDOWER  Come, you shall have Trent turned.

HOTSPUR
I do not care. I'll give thrice so much land
To any well-deserving friend;
But in the way of bargain, mark you me,
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Are the indentures drawn? Shall we be gone?

GLENDOWER
The moon shines fair. You may away by night.
I'll haste the writer, and withal
Break with your wives of your departure hence.
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.	[He exits.]

MORTIMER
Fie, cousin Percy, how you cross my father!

HOTSPUR
I cannot choose. Sometime he angers me
With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
And of a dragon and a finless fish,
A clip-winged griffin and a moulten raven,
A couching lion and a ramping cat,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what--
He held me last night at least nine hours
In reckoning up the several devils' names
That were his lackeys. I cried "Hum," and "Well, go
to,"
But marked him not a word. O, he is as tedious
As a tired horse, a railing wife,
Worse than a smoky house. I had rather live
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me
In any summer house in Christendom.

MORTIMER
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,
Exceedingly well read and profited
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion,
And wondrous affable, and as bountiful
As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin?
He holds your temper in a high respect
And curbs himself even of his natural scope
When you come cross his humor. Faith, he does.
I warrant you that man is not alive
Might so have tempted him as you have done
Without the taste of danger and reproof.
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.

WORCESTER, [to Hotspur]
In faith, my lord, you are too willful-blame,
And, since your coming hither, have done enough
To put him quite besides his patience.
You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault.
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage,
blood--
And that's the dearest grace it renders you--
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
Defect of manners, want of government,
Pride, haughtiness, opinion, and disdain,
The least of which, haunting a nobleman,
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Beguiling them of commendation.

HOTSPUR
Well, I am schooled. Good manners be your speed!
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.

[Enter Glendower with the Ladies.]


MORTIMER
This is the deadly spite that angers me:
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.

GLENDOWER
My daughter weeps; she'll not part with you.
She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.

MORTIMER
Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.
[Glendower speaks to her in Welsh,
and she answers him in the same.]

GLENDOWER
She is desperate here, a peevish self-willed harlotry,
One that no persuasion can do good upon.
[The Lady speaks in Welsh.]

MORTIMER
I understand thy looks. That pretty Welsh
Which thou pourest down from these swelling
heavens
I am too perfect in, and but for shame
In such a parley should I answer thee.
[The Lady speaks again in Welsh. They kiss.]
I understand thy kisses, and thou mine,
And that's a feeling disputation;
But I will never be a truant, love,
Till I have learned thy language; for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penned,
Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower,
With ravishing division, to her lute.

GLENDOWER
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
[The Lady speaks again in Welsh.]

MORTIMER
O, I am ignorance itself in this!

GLENDOWER
She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you,
And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep
As is the difference betwixt day and night
The hour before the heavenly harnessed team
Begins his golden progress in the east.

MORTIMER
With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing.
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn.

GLENDOWER
Do so, and those musicians that shall play to you
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
And straight they shall be here. Sit and attend.

HOTSPUR
Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down.
Come, quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy
lap.

LADY PERCY  Go, you giddy goose.
[The music plays.]

HOTSPUR
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh,
And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous.
By 'r Lady, he is a good musician.

LADY PERCY  Then should you be nothing but musical,
for you are altogether governed by humors. Lie
still, you thief, and hear the lady sing in Welsh.

HOTSPUR  I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in
Irish.

LADY PERCY  Wouldst thou have thy head broken?

HOTSPUR  No.

LADY PERCY  Then be still.

HOTSPUR  Neither; 'tis a woman's fault.

LADY PERCY  Now God help thee!

HOTSPUR  To the Welsh lady's bed.

LADY PERCY  What's that?

HOTSPUR  Peace, she sings.
[Here the Lady sings a Welsh song.]

HOTSPUR  Come, Kate, I'll have your song too.

LADY PERCY  Not mine, in good sooth.

HOTSPUR  Not yours, in good sooth! Heart, you swear
like a comfit-maker's wife! "Not you, in good
sooth," and "as true as I live," and "as God shall
mend me," and "as sure as day"--
And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths
As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,
A good mouth-filling oath, and leave "in sooth,"
And such protest of pepper-gingerbread
To velvet-guards and Sunday citizens.
Come, sing.

LADY PERCY  I will not sing.

HOTSPUR  'Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be redbreast
teacher. An the indentures be drawn, I'll
away within these two hours, and so come in when
you will.	[He exits.]

GLENDOWER
Come, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our book is drawn. We'll but seal,
And then to horse immediately.

MORTIMER  With all my heart.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter the King, Prince of Wales, and others.]


KING
Lords, give us leave; the Prince of Wales and I
Must have some private conference, but be near at
hand,
For we shall presently have need of you.
[Lords exit.]
I know not whether God will have it so
For some displeasing service I have done,
That, in His secret doom, out of my blood
He'll breed revengement and a scourge for me.
But thou dost in thy passages of life
Make me believe that thou art only marked
For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else,
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean
attempts,
Such barren pleasures, rude society
As thou art matched withal, and grafted to,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their level with thy princely heart?

PRINCE
So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all offenses with as clear excuse
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
Myself of many I am charged withal.
Yet such extenuation let me beg
As, in reproof of many tales devised,
Which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear,
By smiling pickthanks and base newsmongers,
I may for some things true, wherein my youth
Hath faulty wandered and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.

KING
God pardon thee. Yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.
Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost,
Which by thy younger brother is supplied,
And art almost an alien to the hearts
Of all the court and princes of my blood.
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruined, and the soul of every man
Prophetically do forethink thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common-hackneyed in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar company,
Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession
And left me in reputeless banishment,
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
But like a comet I was wondered at,
That men would tell their children "This is he."
Others would say "Where? Which is Bolingbroke?"
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
And dressed myself in such humility
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the crowned king.
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,
My presence, like a robe pontifical,
Ne'er seen but wondered at, and so my state,
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast
And won by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping king, he ambled up and down
With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,
Soon kindled and soon burnt; carded his state,
Mingled his royalty with cap'ring fools,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns,
And gave his countenance, against his name,
To laugh at gibing boys and stand the push
Of every beardless vain comparative;
Grew a companion to the common streets,
Enfeoffed himself to popularity,
That, being daily swallowed by men's eyes,
They surfeited with honey and began
To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More than a little is by much too much.
So, when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the cuckoo is in June,
Heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes
As, sick and blunted with community,
Afford no extraordinary gaze
Such as is bent on sunlike majesty
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes,
But rather drowsed and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his face, and rendered such aspect
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, gorged, and full.
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou,
For thou hast lost thy princely privilege
With vile participation. Not an eye
But is aweary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more,
Which now doth that I would not have it do,
Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.

PRINCE
I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord,
Be more myself.

KING  For all the world
As thou art to this hour was Richard then
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,
And even as I was then is Percy now.
Now, by my scepter, and my soul to boot,
He hath more worthy interest to the state
Than thou, the shadow of succession.
For of no right, nor color like to right,
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,
Turns head against the lion's armed jaws,
And, being no more in debt to years than thou,
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on
To bloody battles and to bruising arms.
What never-dying honor hath he got
Against renowned Douglas, whose high deeds,
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms,
Holds from all soldiers chief majority
And military title capital
Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ.
Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swaddling
clothes,
This infant warrior, in his enterprises
Discomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once,
Enlarged him, and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up
And shake the peace and safety of our throne.
And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,
The Archbishop's Grace of York, Douglas,
Mortimer,
Capitulate against us and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,
Which art my nearest and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,
Base inclination, and the start of spleen,
To fight against me under Percy's pay,
To dog his heels, and curtsy at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.

PRINCE
Do not think so. You shall not find it so.
And God forgive them that so much have swayed
Your Majesty's good thoughts away from me.
I will redeem all this on Percy's head,
And, in the closing of some glorious day,
Be bold to tell you that I am your son,
When I will wear a garment all of blood
And stain my favors in a bloody mask,
Which, washed away, shall scour my shame with it.
And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,
That this same child of honor and renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,
And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.
For every honor sitting on his helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled! For the time will come
That I shall make this northern youth exchange
His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my lord,
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf.
And I will call him to so strict account
That he shall render every glory up,
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This in the name of God I promise here,
The which if He be pleased I shall perform,
I do beseech your Majesty may salve
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance.
If not, the end of life cancels all bands,
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.

KING
A hundred thousand rebels die in this.
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.

[Enter Blunt.]

How now, good Blunt? Thy looks are full of speed.

BLUNT
So hath the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word
That Douglas and the English rebels met
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury.
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
If promises be kept on every hand,
As ever offered foul play in a state.

KING
The Earl of Westmoreland set forth today,
With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster,
For this advertisement is five days old.--
On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward.
On Thursday we ourselves will march. Our meeting
Is Bridgenorth. And, Harry, you shall march
Through Gloucestershire; by which account,
Our business valued, some twelve days hence
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our hands are full of business. Let's away.
Advantage feeds him fat while men delay.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Falstaff and Bardolph.]


FALSTAFF  Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since
this last action? Do I not bate? Do I not dwindle?
Why, my skin hangs about me like an old lady's
loose gown. I am withered like an old applejohn.
Well, I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in
some liking. I shall be out of heart shortly, and then
I shall have no strength to repent. An I have not
forgotten what the inside of a church is made of, I
am a peppercorn, a brewer's horse. The inside of a
church! Company, villainous company, hath been
the spoil of me.

BARDOLPH  Sir John, you are so fretful you cannot live
long.

FALSTAFF  Why, there is it. Come, sing me a bawdy
song, make me merry. I was as virtuously given as a
gentleman need to be, virtuous enough: swore
little; diced not above seven times--a week; went to
a bawdy house not above once in a quarter--of an
hour; paid money that I borrowed--three or four
times; lived well and in good compass; and now I
live out of all order, out of all compass.

BARDOLPH  Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must
needs be out of all compass, out of all reasonable
compass, Sir John.

FALSTAFF  Do thou amend thy face, and I'll amend my
life. Thou art our admiral, thou bearest the lantern
in the poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee. Thou art the
Knight of the Burning Lamp.

BARDOLPH  Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.

FALSTAFF  No, I'll be sworn, I make as good use of it as
many a man doth of a death's-head or a memento
mori. I never see thy face but I think upon hellfire
and Dives that lived in purple, for there he is in his
robes, burning, burning. If thou wert any way given
to virtue, I would swear by thy face. My oath should
be "By this fire, that's God's angel." But thou art
altogether given over, and wert indeed, but for the
light in thy face, the son of utter darkness. When
thou ran'st up Gad's Hill in the night to catch my
horse, if I did not think thou hadst been an ignis
fatuus, or a ball of wildfire, there's no purchase in
money. O, thou art a perpetual triumph, an everlasting
bonfire-light. Thou hast saved me a thousand
marks in links and torches, walking with thee in the
night betwixt tavern and tavern, but the sack that
thou hast drunk me would have bought me lights as
good cheap at the dearest chandler's in Europe. I
have maintained that salamander of yours with fire
any time this two-and-thirty years, God reward me
for it.

BARDOLPH  'Sblood, I would my face were in your
belly!

FALSTAFF  Godamercy, so should I be sure to be
heartburned!

[Enter Hostess.]

How now, Dame Partlet the hen, have you enquired
yet who picked my pocket?

HOSTESS  Why, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John,
do you think I keep thieves in my house? I have
searched, I have enquired, so has my husband,
man by man, boy by boy, servant by servant.
The tithe of a hair was never lost in my house
before.

FALSTAFF  You lie, hostess. Bardolph was shaved and
lost many a hair, and I'll be sworn my pocket was
picked. Go to, you are a woman, go.

HOSTESS  Who, I? No, I defy thee! God's light, I was
never called so in mine own house before.

FALSTAFF  Go to, I know you well enough.

HOSTESS  No, Sir John, you do not know me, Sir John. I
know you, Sir John. You owe me money, Sir John,
and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it. I
bought you a dozen of shirts to your back.

FALSTAFF  Dowlas, filthy dowlas. I have given them
away to bakers' wives; they have made bolters of
them.

HOSTESS  Now, as I am a true woman, holland of eight
shillings an ell. You owe money here besides, Sir
John, for your diet and by-drinkings and money
lent you, four-and-twenty pound.

FALSTAFF, [pointing to Bardolph]  He had his part of it.
Let him pay.

HOSTESS  He? Alas, he is poor. He hath nothing.

FALSTAFF  How, poor? Look upon his face. What call
you rich? Let them coin his nose. Let them coin his
cheeks. I'll not pay a denier. What, will you make a
younker of me? Shall I not take mine ease in mine
inn but I shall have my pocket picked? I have lost a
seal ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.

HOSTESS, [to Bardolph]  O Jesu, I have heard the Prince
tell him, I know not how oft, that that ring was
copper.

FALSTAFF  How? The Prince is a jack, a sneak-up.
'Sblood, an he were here, I would cudgel him like a
dog if he would say so.

[Enter the Prince marching, with Peto, and Falstaff
meets him playing upon his truncheon like a fife.]

How now, lad, is the wind in that door, i' faith? Must
we all march?

BARDOLPH  Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.

HOSTESS, [to Prince]  My lord, I pray you, hear me.

PRINCE  What say'st thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth
thy husband? I love him well; he is an honest man.

HOSTESS  Good my lord, hear me.

FALSTAFF  Prithee, let her alone, and list to me.

PRINCE  What say'st thou, Jack?

FALSTAFF  The other night I fell asleep here, behind the
arras, and had my pocket picked. This house is
turned bawdy house; they pick pockets.

PRINCE  What didst thou lose, Jack?

FALSTAFF  Wilt thou believe me, Hal, three or four
bonds of forty pound apiece, and a seal ring of my
grandfather's.

PRINCE  A trifle, some eightpenny matter.

HOSTESS  So I told him, my lord, and I said I heard
your Grace say so. And, my lord, he speaks most
vilely of you, like a foul-mouthed man, as he is, and
said he would cudgel you.

PRINCE  What, he did not!

HOSTESS  There's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood
in me else.

FALSTAFF  There's no more faith in thee than in a
stewed prune, nor no more truth in thee than in a
drawn fox, and for womanhood, Maid Marian may
be the deputy's wife of the ward to thee. Go, you
thing, go.

HOSTESS  Say, what thing, what thing?

FALSTAFF  What thing? Why, a thing to thank God on.

HOSTESS  I am no thing to thank God on, I would thou
shouldst know it! I am an honest man's wife, and,
setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave to
call me so.

FALSTAFF  Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a
beast to say otherwise.

HOSTESS  Say, what beast, thou knave, thou?

FALSTAFF  What beast? Why, an otter.

PRINCE  An otter, Sir John. Why an otter?

FALSTAFF  Why, she's neither fish nor flesh; a man
knows not where to have her.

HOSTESS  Thou art an unjust man in saying so. Thou or
any man knows where to have me, thou knave,
thou.

PRINCE  Thou sayst true, hostess, and he slanders thee
most grossly.

HOSTESS  So he doth you, my lord, and said this other
day you owed him a thousand pound.

PRINCE  Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?

FALSTAFF  A thousand pound, Hal? A million. Thy love is
worth a million; thou owest me thy love.

HOSTESS  Nay, my lord, he called you "jack," and said
he would cudgel you.

FALSTAFF  Did I, Bardolph?

BARDOLPH  Indeed, Sir John, you said so.

FALSTAFF  Yea, if he said my ring was copper.

PRINCE  I say 'tis copper. Darest thou be as good as thy
word now?

FALSTAFF  Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but
man, I dare, but as thou art prince, I fear thee as I
fear the roaring of the lion's whelp.

PRINCE  And why not as the lion?

FALSTAFF  The King himself is to be feared as the lion.
Dost thou think I'll fear thee as I fear thy father?
Nay, an I do, I pray God my girdle break.

PRINCE  O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about
thy knees! But, sirrah, there's no room for faith,
truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine. It is all
filled up with guts and midriff. Charge an honest
woman with picking thy pocket? Why, thou whoreson,
impudent, embossed rascal, if there were
anything in thy pocket but tavern reckonings,
memorandums of bawdy houses, and one poor
pennyworth of sugar candy to make thee long-winded,
if thy pocket were enriched with any other
injuries but these, I am a villain. And yet you will
stand to it! You will not pocket up wrong! Art thou
not ashamed?

FALSTAFF  Dost thou hear, Hal? Thou knowest in the
state of innocency Adam fell, and what should poor
Jack Falstaff do in the days of villainy? Thou seest I
have more flesh than another man and therefore
more frailty. You confess, then, you picked my
pocket.

PRINCE  It appears so by the story.

FALSTAFF  Hostess, I forgive thee. Go make ready
breakfast, love thy husband, look to thy servants,
cherish thy guests. Thou shalt find me tractable
to any honest reason. Thou seest I am pacified still.
Nay, prithee, begone. [(Hostess exits.)] Now, Hal, to
the news at court. For the robbery, lad, how is that
answered?

PRINCE  O, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to
thee. The money is paid back again.

FALSTAFF  O, I do not like that paying back. 'Tis a double
labor.

PRINCE  I am good friends with my father and may do
anything.

FALSTAFF  Rob me the Exchequer the first thing thou
dost, and do it with unwashed hands too.

BARDOLPH  Do, my lord.

PRINCE  I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.

FALSTAFF  I would it had been of horse. Where shall I
find one that can steal well? O, for a fine thief of
the age of two-and-twenty or thereabouts! I am heinously
unprovided. Well, God be thanked for these
rebels. They offend none but the virtuous. I laud
them; I praise them.

PRINCE  Bardolph.

BARDOLPH  My lord.

PRINCE, [handing Bardolph papers]
Go, bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster,
To my brother John; this to my Lord of
Westmoreland.	[Bardolph exits.]
Go, Peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and I
Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.
[Peto exits.]
Jack, meet me tomorrow in the Temple hall
At two o'clock in the afternoon;
There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receive
Money and order for their furniture.
The land is burning. Percy stands on high,
And either we or they must lower lie.	[He exits.]

FALSTAFF
Rare words, brave world!--Hostess, my breakfast,
come.--
O, I could wish this tavern were my drum.
[He exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Hotspur, Worcester, and Douglas.]


HOTSPUR
Well said, my noble Scot. If speaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have
As not a soldier of this season's stamp
Should go so general current through the world.
By God, I cannot flatter. I do defy
The tongues of soothers. But a braver place
In my heart's love hath no man than yourself.
Nay, task me to my word; approve me, lord.

DOUGLAS  Thou art the king of honor.
No man so potent breathes upon the ground
But I will beard him.

HOTSPUR  Do so, and 'tis well.

[Enter a Messenger with letters.]


What letters hast thou there? [To Douglas.] I can but
thank you.

MESSENGER  These letters come from your father.

HOTSPUR
Letters from him! Why comes he not himself?

MESSENGER
He cannot come, my lord. He is grievous sick.

HOTSPUR
Zounds, how has he the leisure to be sick
In such a justling time? Who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?

MESSENGER, [handing letter to Hotspur, who begins
reading it]
His letters bears his mind, not I, my lord.

WORCESTER
I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?

MESSENGER
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth,
And, at the time of my departure thence,
He was much feared by his physicians.

WORCESTER
I would the state of time had first been whole
Ere he by sickness had been visited.
His health was never better worth than now.

HOTSPUR
Sick now? Droop now? This sickness doth infect
The very lifeblood of our enterprise.
'Tis catching hither, even to our camp.
He writes me here that inward sickness--
And that his friends by deputation
Could not so soon be drawn, nor did he think it
meet
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any soul removed but on his own;
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement
That with our small conjunction we should on
To see how fortune is disposed to us,
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now,
Because the King is certainly possessed
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?

WORCESTER
Your father's sickness is a maim to us.

HOTSPUR
A perilous gash, a very limb lopped off!
And yet, in faith, it is not. His present want
Seems more than we shall find it. Were it good
To set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one cast? To set so rich a main
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
It were not good, for therein should we read
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
The very list, the very utmost bound
Of all our fortunes.

DOUGLAS
Faith, and so we should, where now remains
A sweet reversion. We may boldly spend
Upon the hope of what is to come in.
A comfort of retirement lives in this.

HOTSPUR
A rendezvous, a home to fly unto,
If that the devil and mischance look big
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.

WORCESTER
But yet I would your father had been here.
The quality and hair of our attempt
Brooks no division. It will be thought
By some that know not why he is away
That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike
Of our proceedings kept the Earl from hence.
And think how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful faction
And breed a kind of question in our cause.
For well you know, we of the off'ring side
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrament,
And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us.
This absence of your father's draws a curtain
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
Before not dreamt of.

HOTSPUR  You strain too far.
I rather of his absence make this use:
It lends a luster and more great opinion,
A larger dare, to our great enterprise
Than if the Earl were here, for men must think
If we without his help can make a head
To push against a kingdom, with his help
We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down.
Yet all goes well; yet all our joints are whole.

DOUGLAS
As heart can think. There is not such a word
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.

[Enter Sir Richard Vernon.]


HOTSPUR
My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul.

VERNON
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.
The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hitherwards, with him Prince John.

HOTSPUR
No harm, what more?

VERNON  And further I have learned
The King himself in person is set forth,
Or hitherwards intended speedily,
With strong and mighty preparation.

HOTSPUR
He shall be welcome too. Where is his son,
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
And his comrades, that daffed the world aside
And bid it pass?

VERNON  All furnished, all in arms,
All plumed like estridges that with the wind
Bated like eagles having lately bathed,
Glittering in golden coats like images,
As full of spirit as the month of May,
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer,
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.
I saw young Harry with his beaver on,
His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury
And vaulted with such ease into his seat
As if an angel dropped down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.

HOTSPUR
No more, no more! Worse than the sun in March
This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come.
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war
All hot and bleeding will we offer them.
The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh
And yet not ours. Come, let me taste my horse,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse,
Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse.
O, that Glendower were come!

VERNON  There is more news.
I learned in Worcester, as I rode along,
He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.

DOUGLAS
That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.

WORCESTER
Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.

HOTSPUR
What may the King's whole battle reach unto?

VERNON
To thirty thousand.

HOTSPUR  Forty let it be.
My father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us may serve so great a day.
Come, let us take a muster speedily.
Doomsday is near. Die all, die merrily.

DOUGLAS
Talk not of dying. I am out of fear
Of death or death's hand for this one half year.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Falstaff and Bardolph.]


FALSTAFF  Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry. Fill
me a bottle of sack. Our soldiers shall march
through. We'll to Sutton Coldfield tonight.

BARDOLPH  Will you give me money, captain?

FALSTAFF  Lay out, lay out.

BARDOLPH  This bottle makes an angel.

FALSTAFF  An if it do, take it for thy labor. An if it make
twenty, take them all. I'll answer the coinage. Bid
my lieutenant Peto meet me at town's end.

BARDOLPH  I will, captain. Farewell.	[He exits.]

FALSTAFF  If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a
soused gurnet. I have misused the King's press
damnably. I have got, in exchange of a hundred
and fifty soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I
press me none but good householders, yeomen's
sons, inquire me out contracted bachelors, such as
had been asked twice on the banns--such a commodity
of warm slaves as had as lief hear the devil
as a drum, such as fear the report of a caliver worse
than a struck fowl or a hurt wild duck. I pressed me
none but such toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their
bellies no bigger than pins' heads, and they have
bought out their services, and now my whole
charge consists of ancients, corporals, lieutenants,
gentlemen of companies--slaves as ragged as Lazarus
in the painted cloth, where the glutton's dogs
licked his sores; and such as indeed were never
soldiers, but discarded, unjust servingmen, younger
sons to younger brothers, revolted tapsters, and
ostlers tradefallen, the cankers of a calm world and
a long peace, ten times more dishonorable-ragged
than an old feazed ancient; and such have I to fill up
the rooms of them as have bought out their services,
that you would think that I had a hundred and fifty
tattered prodigals lately come from swine-keeping,
from eating draff and husks. A mad fellow met me
on the way and told me I had unloaded all the
gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. No eye hath
seen such scarecrows. I'll not march through Coventry
with them, that's flat. Nay, and the villains
march wide betwixt the legs as if they had gyves on,
for indeed I had the most of them out of prison.
There's not a shirt and a half in all my company,
and the half shirt is two napkins tacked together
and thrown over the shoulders like a herald's coat
without sleeves; and the shirt, to say the truth,
stolen from my host at Saint Albans or the red-nose
innkeeper of Daventry. But that's all one; they'll find
linen enough on every hedge.

[Enter the Prince and the Lord of Westmoreland.]


PRINCE  How now, blown Jack? How now, quilt?

FALSTAFF  What, Hal, how now, mad wag? What a devil
dost thou in Warwickshire?--My good Lord of
Westmoreland, I cry you mercy. I thought your
Honor had already been at Shrewsbury.

WESTMORELAND  Faith, Sir John, 'tis more than time
that I were there and you too, but my powers are
there already. The King, I can tell you, looks for us
all. We must away all night.

FALSTAFF  Tut, never fear me. I am as vigilant as a cat to
steal cream.

PRINCE  I think to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath
already made thee butter. But tell me, Jack, whose
fellows are these that come after?

FALSTAFF  Mine, Hal, mine.

PRINCE  I did never see such pitiful rascals.

FALSTAFF  Tut, tut, good enough to toss; food for powder,
food for powder. They'll fill a pit as well as
better. Tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.

WESTMORELAND  Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are
exceeding poor and bare, too beggarly.

FALSTAFF  Faith, for their poverty, I know not where
they had that, and for their bareness, I am sure they
never learned that of me.

PRINCE  No, I'll be sworn, unless you call three fingers
in the ribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste. Percy is
already in the field.	[He exits.]

FALSTAFF  What, is the King encamped?

WESTMORELAND  He is, Sir John. I fear we shall stay too
long.	[He exits.]

FALSTAFF  Well,
To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a
feast
Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Hotspur, Worcester, Douglas, and Vernon.]


HOTSPUR
We'll fight with him tonight.

WORCESTER  It may not be.

DOUGLAS
You give him then advantage.

VERNON  Not a whit.

HOTSPUR
Why say you so? Looks he not for supply?

VERNON  So do we.

HOTSPUR  His is certain; ours is doubtful.

WORCESTER
Good cousin, be advised. Stir not tonight.

VERNON, [to Hotspur]
Do not, my lord.

DOUGLAS  You do not counsel well.
You speak it out of fear and cold heart.

VERNON
Do me no slander, Douglas. By my life
(And I dare well maintain it with my life),
If well-respected honor bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear
As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives.
Let it be seen tomorrow in the battle
Which of us fears.

DOUGLAS  Yea, or tonight.

VERNON  Content.

HOTSPUR  Tonight, say I.

VERNON
Come, come, it may not be. I wonder much,
Being men of such great leading as you are,
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition. Certain horse
Of my cousin Vernon's are not yet come up.
Your uncle Worcester's horse came but today,
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
Their courage with hard labor tame and dull,
That not a horse is half the half of himself.

HOTSPUR
So are the horses of the enemy
In general journey-bated and brought low.
The better part of ours are full of rest.

WORCESTER
The number of the King exceedeth ours.
For God's sake, cousin, stay till all come in.
[The trumpet sounds a parley.]

[Enter Sir Walter Blunt.]


BLUNT
I come with gracious offers from the King,
If you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.

HOTSPUR
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt, and would to God
You were of our determination.
Some of us love you well, and even those some
Envy your great deservings and good name
Because you are not of our quality
But stand against us like an enemy.

BLUNT
And God defend but still I should stand so,
So long as out of limit and true rule
You stand against anointed majesty.
But to my charge. The King hath sent to know
The nature of your griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land
Audacious cruelty. If that the King
Have any way your good deserts forgot,
Which he confesseth to be manifold,
He bids you name your griefs, and with all speed
You shall have your desires with interest
And pardon absolute for yourself and these
Herein misled by your suggestion.

HOTSPUR
The King is kind, and well we know the King
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
My father and my uncle and myself
Did give him that same royalty he wears,
And when he was not six-and-twenty strong,
Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
My father gave him welcome to the shore;
And when he heard him swear and vow to God
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
To sue his livery, and beg his peace
With tears of innocency and terms of zeal,
My father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance and performed it too.
Now when the lords and barons of the realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with cap and knee,
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
Laid gifts before him, proffered him their oaths,
Gave him their heirs as pages, followed him
Even at the heels in golden multitudes.
He presently, as greatness knows itself,
Steps me a little higher than his vow
Made to my father while his blood was poor
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh,
And now forsooth takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees
That lie too heavy on the commonwealth,
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his country's wrongs, and by this face,
This seeming brow of justice, did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for,
Proceeded further--cut me off the heads
Of all the favorites that the absent king
In deputation left behind him here
When he was personal in the Irish war.

BLUNT
Tut, I came not to hear this.

HOTSPUR  Then to the point.
In short time after, he deposed the King,
Soon after that deprived him of his life
And, in the neck of that, tasked the whole state.
To make that worse, suffered his kinsman March
(Who is, if every owner were well placed,
Indeed his king) to be engaged in Wales,
There without ransom to lie forfeited,
Disgraced me in my happy victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated mine uncle from the council board,
In rage dismissed my father from the court,
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
This head of safety, and withal to pry
Into his title, the which we find
Too indirect for long continuance.

BLUNT
Shall I return this answer to the King?

HOTSPUR
Not so, Sir Walter. We'll withdraw awhile.
Go to the King, and let there be impawned
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall mine uncle
Bring him our purposes. And so farewell.

BLUNT
I would you would accept of grace and love.

HOTSPUR
And maybe so we shall.

BLUNT  Pray God you do.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Archbishop of York and Sir Michael.]


ARCHBISHOP, [handing papers]
Hie, good Sir Michael, bear this sealed brief
With winged haste to the Lord Marshal,
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest
To whom they are directed. If you knew
How much they do import, you would make haste.

SIR MICHAEL
My good lord, I guess their tenor.

ARCHBISHOP  Like enough you do.
Tomorrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
Must bide the touch. For, sir, at Shrewsbury,
As I am truly given to understand,
The King with mighty and quick-raised power
Meets with Lord Harry. And I fear, Sir Michael,
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose power was in the first proportion,
And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,
Who with them was a rated sinew too
And comes not in, o'erruled by prophecies,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
To wage an instant trial with the King.

SIR MICHAEL
Why, my good lord, you need not fear.
There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.

ARCHBISHOP  No, Mortimer is not there.

SIR MICHAEL
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
And there is my Lord of Worcester, and a head
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.

ARCHBISHOP
And so there is. But yet the King hath drawn
The special head of all the land together:
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
The noble Westmoreland, and warlike Blunt,
And many more corrivals and dear men
Of estimation and command in arms.

SIR MICHAEL
Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.

ARCHBISHOP
I hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear;
And to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed.
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King
Dismiss his power he means to visit us,
For he hath heard of our confederacy,
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him.
Therefore make haste. I must go write again
To other friends. And so farewell, Sir Michael.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the King, Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
Sir Walter Blunt, and Falstaff.]


KING
How bloodily the sun begins to peer
Above yon bulky hill. The day looks pale
At his distemp'rature.

PRINCE  The southern wind
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves
Foretells a tempest and a blust'ring day.

KING
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
[The trumpet sounds.]

[Enter Worcester and Vernon.]

How now, my Lord of Worcester? 'Tis not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust
And made us doff our easy robes of peace
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel.
This is not well, my lord; this is not well.
What say you to it? Will you again unknit
This churlish knot of all-abhorred war
And move in that obedient orb again
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhaled meteor,
A prodigy of fear, and a portent
Of broached mischief to the unborn times?

WORCESTER  Hear me, my liege:
For mine own part I could be well content
To entertain the lag end of my life
With quiet hours. For I protest
I have not sought the day of this dislike.

KING
You have not sought it. How comes it then?

FALSTAFF  Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.

PRINCE  Peace, chewet, peace.

WORCESTER
It pleased your Majesty to turn your looks
Of favor from myself and all our house;
And yet I must remember you, my lord,
We were the first and dearest of your friends.
For you my staff of office did I break
In Richard's time, and posted day and night
To meet you on the way and kiss your hand
When yet you were in place and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was myself, my brother, and his son
That brought you home and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state,
Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,
The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster.
To this we swore our aid. But in short space
It rained down fortune show'ring on your head,
And such a flood of greatness fell on you--
What with our help, what with the absent king,
What with the injuries of a wanton time,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious winds that held the King
So long in his unlucky Irish wars
That all in England did repute him dead--
And from this swarm of fair advantages
You took occasion to be quickly wooed
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Forgot your oath to us at Doncaster;
And being fed by us, you used us so
As that ungentle gull, the cuckoo's bird,
Useth the sparrow--did oppress our nest,
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk
That even our love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing
We were enforced for safety sake to fly
Out of your sight and raise this present head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you yourself have forged against yourself
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.

KING
These things indeed you have articulate,
Proclaimed at market crosses, read in churches,
To face the garment of rebellion
With some fine color that may please the eye
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
Of hurlyburly innovation.
And never yet did insurrection want
Such water colors to impaint his cause,
Nor moody beggars starving for a time
Of pellmell havoc and confusion.

PRINCE
In both your armies there is many a soul
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter
If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew,
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percy. By my hopes,
This present enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a braver gentleman,
More active-valiant, or more valiant-young,
More daring or more bold, is now alive
To grace this latter age with noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame,
I have a truant been to chivalry,
And so I hear he doth account me too.
Yet this before my father's majesty:
I am content that he shall take the odds
Of his great name and estimation,
And will, to save the blood on either side,
Try fortune with him in a single fight.

KING
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit considerations infinite
Do make against it.--No, good Worcester, no.
We love our people well, even those we love
That are misled upon your cousin's part.
And, will they take the offer of our grace,
Both he and they and you, yea, every man
Shall be my friend again, and I'll be his.
So tell your cousin, and bring me word
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us,
And they shall do their office. So begone.
We will not now be troubled with reply.
We offer fair. Take it advisedly.
[Worcester exits with Vernon.]

PRINCE
It will not be accepted, on my life.
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
Are confident against the world in arms.

KING
Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge,
For on their answer will we set on them,
And God befriend us as our cause is just.
[They exit. Prince and Falstaff remain.]

FALSTAFF  Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and
bestride me, so; 'tis a point of friendship.

PRINCE  Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.
Say thy prayers, and farewell.

FALSTAFF  I would 'twere bedtime, Hal, and all well.

PRINCE  Why, thou owest God a death.	[He exits.]

FALSTAFF  'Tis not due yet. I would be loath to pay Him
before His day. What need I be so forward with
Him that calls not on me? Well, 'tis no matter.
Honor pricks me on. Yea, but how if honor prick me
off when I come on? How then? Can honor set to a
leg? No. Or an arm? No. Or take away the grief of a
wound? No. Honor hath no skill in surgery, then?
No. What is honor? A word. What is in that word
"honor"? What is that "honor"? Air. A trim reckoning.
Who hath it? He that died o' Wednesday. Doth
he feel it? No. Doth he hear it? No. 'Tis insensible,
then? Yea, to the dead. But will it not live with the
living? No. Why? Detraction will not suffer it. Therefore,
I'll none of it. Honor is a mere scutcheon. And
so ends my catechism.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Worcester and Sir Richard Vernon.]


WORCESTER
O no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
The liberal and kind offer of the King.

VERNON
'Twere best he did.

WORCESTER  Then are we all undone.
It is not possible, it cannot be
The King should keep his word in loving us.
He will suspect us still and find a time
To punish this offense in other faults.
Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of
eyes,
For treason is but trusted like the fox,
Who, never so tame, so cherished and locked up,
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.
Look how we can, or sad or merrily,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,
The better cherished still the nearer death.
My nephew's trespass may be well forgot;
It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood,
And an adopted name of privilege--
A harebrained Hotspur governed by a spleen.
All his offenses live upon my head
And on his father's. We did train him on,
And his corruption being ta'en from us,
We as the spring of all shall pay for all.
Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know
In any case the offer of the King.

VERNON
Deliver what you will; I'll say 'tis so.

[Enter Hotspur, Douglas, and their army.]

Here comes your cousin.

HOTSPUR, [to Douglas]  My uncle is returned.
Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.--
Uncle, what news?

WORCESTER
The King will bid you battle presently.

DOUGLAS, [to Hotspur]
Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.

HOTSPUR
Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.

DOUGLAS
Marry, and shall, and very willingly.	[Douglas exits.]

WORCESTER
There is no seeming mercy in the King.

HOTSPUR
Did you beg any? God forbid!

WORCESTER
I told him gently of our grievances,
Of his oath-breaking, which he mended thus
By now forswearing that he is forsworn.
He calls us "rebels," "traitors," and will scourge
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.

[Enter Douglas.]


DOUGLAS
Arm, gentlemen, to arms. For I have thrown
A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth,
And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.

WORCESTER
The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the King,
And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.

HOTSPUR
O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath today
But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,
How showed his tasking? Seemed it in contempt?

VERNON
No, by my soul. I never in my life
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a brother should a brother dare
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the duties of a man,
Trimmed up your praises with a princely tongue,
Spoke your deservings like a chronicle,
Making you ever better than his praise
By still dispraising praise valued with you,
And, which became him like a prince indeed,
He made a blushing cital of himself,
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
As if he mastered there a double spirit
Of teaching and of learning instantly.
There did he pause, but let me tell the world:
If he outlive the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.

HOTSPUR
Cousin, I think thou art enamored
On his follies. Never did I hear
Of any prince so wild a liberty.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
I will embrace him with a soldier's arm
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.--
Arm, arm with speed, and, fellows, soldiers,
friends,
Better consider what you have to do
Than I that have not well the gift of tongue
Can lift your blood up with persuasion.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  My lord, here are letters for you.

HOTSPUR  I cannot read them now.--
O gentlemen, the time of life is short;
To spend that shortness basely were too long
If life did ride upon a dial's point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
An if we live, we live to tread on kings;
If die, brave death, when princes die with us.
Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair
When the intent of bearing them is just.

[Enter another Messenger.]


SECOND MESSENGER
My lord, prepare. The King comes on apace.

HOTSPUR
I thank him that he cuts me from my tale,
For I profess not talking. Only this:
Let each man do his best. And here draw I a sword,
Whose temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal
In the adventure of this perilous day.
Now, Esperance! Percy! And set on.
Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
And by that music let us all embrace,
For, heaven to Earth, some of us never shall
A second time do such a courtesy.
[Here they embrace. The trumpets sound.]
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[The King enters with his power, crosses the stage and
exits. Alarum to the battle. Then enter Douglas, and Sir
Walter Blunt, disguised as the King.]


BLUNT, [as King]
What is thy name that in the battle thus
Thou crossest me? What honor dost thou seek
Upon my head?

DOUGLAS  Know then my name is Douglas,
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
Because some tell me that thou art a king.

BLUNT, [as King]  They tell thee true.

DOUGLAS
The Lord of Stafford dear today hath bought
Thy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry,
This sword hath ended him. So shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.

BLUNT, [as King]
I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot,
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge
Lord Stafford's death.
[They fight. Douglas kills Blunt.]

[Then enter Hotspur.]


HOTSPUR
O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,
I never had triumphed upon a Scot.

DOUGLAS
All's done, all's won; here breathless lies the King.

HOTSPUR  Where?

DOUGLAS  Here.

HOTSPUR
This, Douglas? No, I know this face full well.
A gallant knight he was; his name was Blunt,
Semblably furnished like the King himself.

DOUGLAS, [addressing Blunt's corpse]
A fool go with thy soul whither it goes!
A borrowed title hast thou bought too dear.
Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?

HOTSPUR
The King hath many marching in his coats.

DOUGLAS
Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats.
I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece,
Until I meet the King.

HOTSPUR  Up and away!
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
[They exit.]

[Alarm. Enter Falstaff alone.]


FALSTAFF  Though I could 'scape shot-free at London,
I fear the shot here. Here's no scoring but upon
the pate.--Soft, who are you? Sir Walter Blunt.
There's honor for you. Here's no vanity. I am as hot
as molten lead, and as heavy too. God keep lead out
of me; I need no more weight than mine own
bowels. I have led my ragamuffins where they are
peppered. There's not three of my hundred and fifty
left alive, and they are for the town's end, to beg
during life. But who comes here?

[Enter the Prince.]


PRINCE
What, stand'st thou idle here? Lend me thy sword.
Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff
Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,
Whose deaths are yet unrevenged. I prithee
Lend me thy sword.

FALSTAFF  O Hal, I prithee give me leave to breathe
awhile. Turk Gregory never did such deeds in arms
as I have done this day. I have paid Percy; I have
made him sure.

PRINCE
He is indeed, and living to kill thee.
I prithee, lend me thy sword.

FALSTAFF  Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou
gett'st not my sword; but take my pistol, if thou
wilt.

PRINCE
Give it me. What, is it in the case?

FALSTAFF  Ay, Hal, 'tis hot, 'tis hot. There's that will
sack a city.
[The Prince draws it out, and finds it
to be a bottle of sack.]

PRINCE
What, is it a time to jest and dally now?
[He throws the bottle at him and exits.]

FALSTAFF  Well, if Percy be alive, I'll pierce him. If he do
come in my way, so; if he do not, if I come in his
willingly, let him make a carbonado of me. I like not
such grinning honor as Sir Walter hath. Give me
life, which, if I can save, so: if not, honor comes
unlooked for, and there's an end.
[He exits. Blunt's body is carried off.]

Scene 4
=======
[Alarm, excursions. Enter the King, the Prince, Lord John
of Lancaster, and the Earl of Westmoreland.]


KING
I prithee, Harry, withdraw thyself. Thou bleedest
too much.
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.

LANCASTER
Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.

PRINCE
I beseech your Majesty, make up,
Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.

KING
I will do so.--My Lord of Westmoreland,
Lead him to his tent.

WESTMORELAND
Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.

PRINCE
Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help,
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stained nobility lies trodden on,
And rebels' arms triumph in massacres.

LANCASTER
We breathe too long. Come, cousin Westmoreland,
Our duty this way lies. For God's sake, come.
[Lancaster and Westmoreland exit.]

PRINCE
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster.
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit.
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John,
But now I do respect thee as my soul.

KING
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point
With lustier maintenance than I did look for
Of such an ungrown warrior.

PRINCE
O, this boy lends mettle to us all.	[He exits.]

[Enter Douglas.]


DOUGLAS
Another king! They grow like Hydra's heads.--
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
That wear those colors on them. What art thou
That counterfeit'st the person of a king?

KING
The King himself, who, Douglas, grieves at heart,
So many of his shadows thou hast met
And not the very king. I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyself about the field,
But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,
I will assay thee. And defend thyself.

DOUGLAS
I fear thou art another counterfeit,
And yet, in faith, thou bearest thee like a king.
But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,
And thus I win thee.

[They fight. The King being in danger,
enter Prince of Wales.]


PRINCE
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again. The spirits
Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt are in my arms.
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
[They fight. Douglas flieth.]
[To King.] Cheerly, my lord. How fares your Grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,
And so hath Clifton. I'll to Clifton straight.

KING  Stay and breathe awhile.
Thou hast redeemed thy lost opinion
And showed thou mak'st some tender of my life
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.

PRINCE
O God, they did me too much injury
That ever said I hearkened for your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world,
And saved the treacherous labor of your son.

KING
Make up to Clifton. I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.
[King exits.]

[Enter Hotspur.]


HOTSPUR
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.

PRINCE
Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name.

HOTSPUR
My name is Harry Percy.

PRINCE  Why then I see
A very valiant rebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,
To share with me in glory any more.
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double reign
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.

HOTSPUR
Nor shall it, Harry, for the hour is come
To end the one of us, and would to God
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine.

PRINCE
I'll make it greater ere I part from thee,
And all the budding honors on thy crest
I'll crop to make a garland for my head.

HOTSPUR
I can no longer brook thy vanities.	[They fight.]

[Enter Falstaff.]


FALSTAFF  Well said, Hal! To it, Hal! Nay, you shall find
no boys' play here, I can tell you.

[Enter Douglas. He fighteth with Falstaff, who falls
down as if he were dead. Douglas exits. The Prince
killeth Percy.]


HOTSPUR
O Harry, thou hast robbed me of my youth.
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me.
They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my
flesh.
But thoughts, the slaves of life, and life, time's fool,
And time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue. No, Percy, thou art dust,
And food for--	[He dies.]

PRINCE
For worms, brave Percy. Fare thee well, great heart.
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound,
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough. This earth that bears thee dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so dear a show of zeal.
But let my favors hide thy mangled face;
[He covers Hotspur's face.]
And even in thy behalf I'll thank myself
For doing these fair rites of tenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven.
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not remembered in thy epitaph.
[He spieth Falstaff on the ground.]
What, old acquaintance, could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell.
I could have better spared a better man.
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee
If I were much in love with vanity.
Death hath not struck so fat a deer today,
Though many dearer in this bloody fray.
Emboweled will I see thee by and by;
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.	[He exits.]
[Falstaff riseth up.]

FALSTAFF  Emboweled? If thou embowel me today, I'll
give you leave to powder me and eat me too
tomorrow. 'Sblood, 'twas time to counterfeit, or
that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot
too. Counterfeit? I lie. I am no counterfeit. To die is
to be a counterfeit, for he is but the counterfeit of a
man who hath not the life of a man; but to counterfeit
dying when a man thereby liveth is to be no
counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life
indeed. The better part of valor is discretion, in the
which better part I have saved my life. Zounds, I am
afraid of this gunpowder Percy, though he be dead.
How if he should counterfeit too, and rise? By my
faith, I am afraid he would prove the better counterfeit.
Therefore I'll make him sure, yea, and I'll swear
I killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I?
Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.
Therefore, sirrah, [stabbing him] with a new wound
in your thigh, come you along with me.
[He takes up Hotspur on his back.]

[Enter Prince and John of Lancaster.]


PRINCE
Come, brother John. Full bravely hast thou fleshed
Thy maiden sword.

LANCASTER  But soft, whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?

PRINCE  I did; I saw him dead,
Breathless and bleeding on the ground.--Art thou
alive?
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
I prithee, speak. We will not trust our eyes
Without our ears. Thou art not what thou seem'st.

FALSTAFF  No, that's certain. I am not a double man.
But if I be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a jack. There
is Percy. If your father will do me any honor, so; if
not, let him kill the next Percy himself. I look to be
either earl or duke, I can assure you.

PRINCE
Why, Percy I killed myself, and saw thee dead.

FALSTAFF  Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is
given to lying. I grant you, I was down and out of
breath, and so was he, but we rose both at an instant
and fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I
may be believed, so; if not, let them that should
reward valor bear the sin upon their own heads. I'll
take it upon my death, I gave him this wound in
the thigh. If the man were alive and would deny
it, zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my
sword.

LANCASTER
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.

PRINCE
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.--
Come bring your luggage nobly on your back.
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
[A retreat is sounded.]
The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.
Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
[They exit.]

FALSTAFF  I'll follow, as they say, for reward. He that
rewards me, God reward him. If I do grow great,
I'll grow less, for I'll purge and leave sack and live
cleanly as a nobleman should do.
[He exits carrying Hotspur's body.]

Scene 5
=======
[The trumpets sound. Enter the King, Prince of Wales,
Lord John of Lancaster, Earl of Westmoreland, with
Worcester and Vernon prisoners, and Soldiers.]


KING
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.--
Ill-spirited Worcester, did not we send grace,
Pardon, and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary,
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?
Three knights upon our party slain today,
A noble earl, and many a creature else
Had been alive this hour
If, like a Christian, thou hadst truly borne
Betwixt our armies true intelligence.

WORCESTER
What I have done my safety urged me to.
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.

KING
Bear Worcester to the death, and Vernon too.
Other offenders we will pause upon.
[Worcester and Vernon exit, under guard.]
How goes the field?

PRINCE
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turned from him,
The noble Percy slain, and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest,
And, falling from a hill, he was so bruised
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is, and I beseech your Grace
I may dispose of him.

KING  With all my heart.

PRINCE
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
This honorable bounty shall belong.
Go to the Douglas and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free.
His valors shown upon our crests today
Have taught us how to cherish such high deeds,
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.

LANCASTER
I thank your Grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.

KING
Then this remains, that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland,
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest
speed
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms.
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the check of such another day.
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.
[They exit.]



Henry VI, Part 1
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/henry-vi-part-1/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
The English
KING HENRY VI
Lord TALBOT, afterwards Earl of Shrewsbury
JOHN TALBOT, his son
Duke of GLOUCESTER, the king's uncle, and Lord Protector
Duke of BEDFORD, the king's uncle, and Regent of France
Duke of EXETER, the king's great-uncle
Cardinal, Bishop of WINCHESTER, the king's great-uncle
Duke of SOMERSET
Richard PLANTAGENET, later Duke of YORK, and Regent of France
Earl of WARWICK
Earl of SALISBURY
Earl of SUFFOLK, William de la Pole
Edmund MORTIMER, Earl of March
Sir William GLANSDALE
Sir Thomas GARGRAVE
Sir John FASTOLF
Sir William LUCY
WOODVILLE, Lieutenant of the Tower of London
VERNON, of the White Rose or York faction
BASSET, of the Red Rose or Lancaster faction
A LAWYER
JAILORS to Mortimer
A LEGATE
MAYOR of London
Heralds, Attendants, three Messengers, Servingmen in blue coats and in tawny coats, two Warders, Officers, Soldiers, Captains, Watch, Trumpeters, Drummer, Servant, two Ambassadors

The French
CHARLES, Dauphin of France
Joan la PUCELLE, also Joan of Arc
REIGNIER, Duke of Anjou and Maine, King of Naples
MARGARET, his daughter
Duke of ALANSON
Bastard of ORLEANCE
Duke of BURGUNDY
GENERAL of the French forces at Bordeaux
COUNTESS of Auvergne
Her PORTER
MASTER GUNNER of Orleance
BOY, his son
SERGEANT of a Band
A SHEPHERD, Pucelle's father
Drummer, Soldiers, two Sentinels, Messenger, Soldiers, Governor of Paris, Herald, Scout, Fiends accompanying Pucelle


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Dead March. Enter the funeral of King Henry the Fifth,
attended on by the Duke of Bedford, Regent of France;
the Duke of Gloucester, Protector; the Duke of Exeter;
the Earl of Warwick; the Bishop of Winchester; and
the Duke of Somerset, with Heralds and Attendants.]


BEDFORD
Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to night!
Comets, importing change of times and states,
Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky,
And with them scourge the bad revolting stars
That have consented unto Henry's death:
King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long.
England ne'er lost a king of so much worth.

GLOUCESTER
England ne'er had a king until his time.
Virtue he had, deserving to command;
His brandished sword did blind men with his beams;
His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings;
His sparkling eyes, replete with wrathful fire,
More dazzled and drove back his enemies
Than midday sun fierce bent against their faces.
What should I say? His deeds exceed all speech.
He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.

EXETER
We mourn in black; why mourn we not in blood?
Henry is dead and never shall revive.
Upon a wooden coffin we attend,
And Death's dishonorable victory
We with our stately presence glorify,
Like captives bound to a triumphant car.
What? Shall we curse the planets of mishap
That plotted thus our glory's overthrow?
Or shall we think the subtle-witted French
Conjurers and sorcerers, that, afraid of him,
By magic verses have contrived his end?

WINCHESTER
He was a king blest of the King of kings;
Unto the French the dreadful Judgment Day
So dreadful will not be as was his sight.
The battles of the Lord of Hosts he fought;
The Church's prayers made him so prosperous.

GLOUCESTER
The Church? Where is it? Had not churchmen prayed,
His thread of life had not so soon decayed.
None do you like but an effeminate prince
Whom like a schoolboy you may overawe.

WINCHESTER
Gloucester, whate'er we like, thou art Protector
And lookest to command the Prince and realm.
Thy wife is proud; she holdeth thee in awe
More than God or religious churchmen may.

GLOUCESTER
Name not religion, for thou lov'st the flesh,
And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st,
Except it be to pray against thy foes.

BEDFORD
Cease, cease these jars, and rest your minds in peace!
Let's to the altar.--Heralds, wait on us.--
Instead of gold, we'll offer up our arms,
Since arms avail not, now that Henry's dead.
Posterity, await for wretched years
When at their mothers' moistened eyes babes shall
suck,
Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears,
And none but women left to wail the dead.
Henry the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate:
Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils,
Combat with adverse planets in the heavens.
A far more glorious star thy soul will make
Than Julius Caesar or bright--

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
My honorable lords, health to you all.
Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
Of loss, of slaughter, and discomfiture:
Guyen, Champaigne, Rheims, Roan, Orleance,
Paris, Gisors, Poitiers, are all quite lost.

BEDFORD
What say'st thou, man, before dead Henry's corse?
Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns
Will make him burst his lead and rise from death.

GLOUCESTER
Is Paris lost? Is Roan yielded up?
If Henry were recalled to life again,
These news would cause him once more yield the
ghost.

EXETER
How were they lost? What treachery was used?

MESSENGER
No treachery, but want of men and money.
Amongst the soldiers, this is muttered:
That here you maintain several factions
And, whilst a field should be dispatched and fought,
You are disputing of your generals.
One would have ling'ring wars with little cost;
Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings;
A third thinks, without expense at all,
By guileful fair words peace may be obtained.
Awake, awake, English nobility!
Let not sloth dim your honors new begot.
Cropped are the flower-de-luces in your arms;
Of England's coat, one half is cut away.	[He exits.]

EXETER
Were our tears wanting to this funeral,
These tidings would call forth her flowing tides.

BEDFORD
Me they concern; regent I am of France.
Give me my steeled coat, I'll fight for France.
Away with these disgraceful wailing robes.
Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes
To weep their intermissive miseries.

[Enter to them another Messenger, with papers.]


SECOND MESSENGER
Lords, view these letters, full of bad mischance.
France is revolted from the English quite,
Except some petty towns of no import.
The Dauphin Charles is crowned king in Rheims;
The Bastard of Orleance with him is joined;
Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part;
The Duke of Alanson flieth to his side.	[He exits.]

EXETER
The Dauphin crowned king? All fly to him?
O, whither shall we fly from this reproach?

GLOUCESTER
We will not fly but to our enemies' throats.--
Bedford, if thou be slack, I'll fight it out.

BEDFORD
Gloucester, why doubt'st thou of my forwardness?
An army have I mustered in my thoughts,
Wherewith already France is overrun.

[Enter another Messenger.]


THIRD MESSENGER
My gracious lords, to add to your laments,
Wherewith you now bedew King Henry's hearse,
I must inform you of a dismal fight
Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French.

WINCHESTER
What? Wherein Talbot overcame, is 't so?

THIRD MESSENGER
O no, wherein Lord Talbot was o'erthrown.
The circumstance I'll tell you more at large.
The tenth of August last, this dreadful lord,
Retiring from the siege of Orleance,
Having full scarce six thousand in his troop,
By three and twenty thousand of the French
Was round encompassed and set upon.
No leisure had he to enrank his men.
He wanted pikes to set before his archers,
Instead whereof, sharp stakes plucked out of hedges
They pitched in the ground confusedly
To keep the horsemen off from breaking in.
More than three hours the fight continued,
Where valiant Talbot, above human thought,
Enacted wonders with his sword and lance.
Hundreds he sent to hell, and none durst stand him;
Here, there, and everywhere, enraged, he slew.
The French exclaimed the devil was in arms;
All the whole army stood agazed on him.
His soldiers, spying his undaunted spirit,
"A Talbot! A Talbot!" cried out amain
And rushed into the bowels of the battle.
Here had the conquest fully been sealed up
If Sir John Fastolf had not played the coward.
He, being in the vaward, placed behind
With purpose to relieve and follow them,
Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke.
Hence grew the general wrack and massacre.
Enclosed were they with their enemies.
A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin's grace,
Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back,
Whom all France, with their chief assembled
strength,
Durst not presume to look once in the face.

BEDFORD
Is Talbot slain then? I will slay myself
For living idly here, in pomp and ease,
Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid,
Unto his dastard foemen is betrayed.

THIRD MESSENGER
O, no, he lives, but is took prisoner,
And Lord Scales with him, and Lord Hungerford;
Most of the rest slaughtered or took likewise.

BEDFORD
His ransom there is none but I shall pay.
I'll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne;
His crown shall be the ransom of my friend.
Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours.
Farewell, my masters; to my task will I.
Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make,
To keep our great Saint George's feast withal.
Ten thousand soldiers with me I will take,
Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.

THIRD MESSENGER
So you had need; 'fore Orleance besieged,
The English army is grown weak and faint;
The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply
And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,
Since they so few watch such a multitude.
[He exits.]

EXETER
Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn:
Either to quell the Dauphin utterly
Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.

BEDFORD
I do remember it, and here take my leave
To go about my preparation.	[Bedford exits.]

GLOUCESTER
I'll to the Tower with all the haste I can
To view th' artillery and munition,
And then I will proclaim young Henry king.
[Gloucester exits.]

EXETER
To Eltham will I, where the young king is,
Being ordained his special governor;
And for his safety there I'll best devise.	[He exits.]

WINCHESTER, [aside]
Each hath his place and function to attend.
I am left out; for me nothing remains.
But long I will not be Jack-out-of-office.
The King from Eltham I intend to steal,
And sit at chiefest stern of public weal.
[He exits at one door; at another door,
Warwick, Somerset, Attendants and
Heralds exit with the coffin.]

Scene 2
=======
[Sound a flourish. Enter Charles the Dauphin,
Alanson, and Reignier, marching with Drum
and Soldiers.]


CHARLES
Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens
So in the Earth, to this day is not known.
Late did he shine upon the English side;
Now we are victors; upon us he smiles.
What towns of any moment but we have?
At pleasure here we lie, near Orleance.
Otherwhiles, the famished English, like pale ghosts,
Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.

ALANSON
They want their porridge and their fat bull beeves.
Either they must be dieted like mules
And have their provender tied to their mouths,
Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.

REIGNIER
Let's raise the siege. Why live we idly here?
Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear.
Remaineth none but mad-brained Salisbury,
And he may well in fretting spend his gall;
Nor men nor money hath he to make war.

CHARLES
Sound, sound alarum! We will rush on them.
Now for the honor of the forlorn French!
Him I forgive my death that killeth me
When he sees me go back one foot, or fly.
[They exit. Here alarum. They are beaten
back by the English, with great loss.]

[Enter Charles, Alanson, and Reignier.]


CHARLES
Whoever saw the like? What men have I!
Dogs, cowards, dastards! I would ne'er have fled
But that they left me 'midst my enemies.

REIGNIER
Salisbury is a desperate homicide.
He fighteth as one weary of his life.
The other lords, like lions wanting food,
Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.

ALANSON
Froissart, a countryman of ours, records
England all Olivers and Rolands bred
During the time Edward the Third did reign.
More truly now may this be verified,
For none but Samsons and Goliases
It sendeth forth to skirmish. One to ten!
Lean rawboned rascals! Who would e'er suppose
They had such courage and audacity?

CHARLES
Let's leave this town, for they are hare-brained slaves,
And hunger will enforce them to be more eager.
Of old I know them; rather with their teeth
The walls they'll tear down than forsake the siege.

REIGNIER
I think by some odd gimmers or device
Their arms are set, like clocks, still to strike on;
Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do.
By my consent, we'll even let them alone.

ALANSON  Be it so.

[Enter the Bastard of Orleance.]


BASTARD
Where's the Prince Dauphin? I have news for him.

CHARLES
Bastard of Orleance, thrice welcome to us.

BASTARD
Methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appalled.
Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?
Be not dismayed, for succor is at hand.
A holy maid hither with me I bring,
Which, by a vision sent to her from heaven,
Ordained is to raise this tedious siege
And drive the English forth the bounds of France.
The spirit of deep prophecy she hath,
Exceeding the nine Sibyls of old Rome.
What's past and what's to come she can descry.
Speak, shall I call her in? Believe my words,
For they are certain and unfallible.

CHARLES
Go call her in.	[Bastard exits.]
But first, to try her skill,
Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place;
Question her proudly; let thy looks be stern.
By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.

[Enter Bastard, with Joan la Pucelle.]


REIGNIER, [as Charles]
Fair maid, is 't thou wilt do these wondrous feats?

PUCELLE
Reignier, is 't thou that thinkest to beguile me?
Where is the Dauphin?--Come, come from behind.
I know thee well, though never seen before.
Be not amazed; there's nothing hid from me.
In private will I talk with thee apart.--
Stand back, you lords, and give us leave a while.

REIGNIER
She takes upon her bravely at first dash.
[Alanson, Reignier, and Bastard exit.]

PUCELLE
Dauphin, I am by birth a shepherd's daughter,
My wit untrained in any kind of art.
Heaven and Our Lady gracious hath it pleased
To shine on my contemptible estate.
Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs,
And to sun's parching heat displayed my cheeks,
God's Mother deigned to appear to me,
And in a vision full of majesty
Willed me to leave my base vocation
And free my country from calamity.
Her aid she promised and assured success.
In complete glory she revealed herself;
And whereas I was black and swart before,
With those clear rays which she infused on me
That beauty am I blest with, which you may see.
Ask me what question thou canst possible,
And I will answer unpremeditated.
My courage try by combat, if thou dar'st,
And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.
Resolve on this: thou shalt be fortunate
If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.

CHARLES
Thou hast astonished me with thy high terms.
Only this proof I'll of thy valor make:
In single combat thou shalt buckle with me,
And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true;
Otherwise I renounce all confidence.

PUCELLE
I am prepared. Here is my keen-edged sword,
Decked with fine flower-de-luces on each side--
[Aside.] The which at Touraine, in Saint Katherine's
churchyard,
Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.

CHARLES
Then come, a' God's name! I fear no woman.

PUCELLE
And while I live, I'll ne'er fly from a man.
[Here they fight, and
Joan la Pucelle overcomes.]

CHARLES
Stay, stay thy hands! Thou art an Amazon,
And fightest with the sword of Deborah.

PUCELLE
Christ's mother helps me; else I were too weak.

CHARLES
Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me.
Impatiently I burn with thy desire.
My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued.
Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so,
Let me thy servant and not sovereign be.
'Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.

PUCELLE
I must not yield to any rights of love,
For my profession's sacred from above.
When I have chased all thy foes from hence,
Then will I think upon a recompense.

CHARLES
Meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall.

[Enter Reignier and Alanson.]


REIGNIER, [aside to Alanson]
My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.

ALANSON, [aside to Reignier]
Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock,
Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.

REIGNIER, [aside to Alanson]
Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?

ALANSON, [aside to Reignier]
He may mean more than we poor men do know.
These women are shrewd tempters with their
tongues.

REIGNIER, [to Charles]
My lord, where are you? What devise you on?
Shall we give o'er Orleance, or no?

PUCELLE
Why, no, I say. Distrustful recreants,
Fight till the last gasp. I'll be your guard.

CHARLES
What she says I'll confirm: we'll fight it out.

PUCELLE
Assigned am I to be the English scourge.
This night the siege assuredly I'll raise.
Expect Saint Martin's summer, halcyons' days,
Since I have entered into these wars.
Glory is like a circle in the water,
Which never ceaseth to enlarge itself
Till by broad spreading it disperse to naught.
With Henry's death, the English circle ends;
Dispersed are the glories it included.
Now am I like that proud insulting ship
Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.

CHARLES
Was Mahomet inspired with a dove?
Thou with an eagle art inspired then.
Helen, the mother of great Constantine,
Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters were like thee.
Bright star of Venus, fall'n down on the Earth,
How may I reverently worship thee enough?

ALANSON
Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.

REIGNIER
Woman, do what thou canst to save our honors.
Drive them from Orleance and be immortalized.

CHARLES
Presently we'll try. Come, let's away about it.
No prophet will I trust if she prove false.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Gloucester with his Servingmen in blue coats.]


GLOUCESTER
I am come to survey the Tower this day.
Since Henry's death I fear there is conveyance.
Where be these warders that they wait not here?--
Open the gates! 'Tis Gloucester that calls.
[Servingmen knock at the gate.]

FIRST WARDER, [within]
Who's there that knocks so imperiously?

FIRST SERVINGMAN
It is the noble Duke of Gloucester.

SECOND WARDER, [within]
Whoe'er he be, you may not be let in.

FIRST SERVINGMAN
Villains, answer you so the Lord Protector?

FIRST WARDER, [within]
The Lord protect him, so we answer him.
We do no otherwise than we are willed.

GLOUCESTER
Who willed you? Or whose will stands but mine?
There's none Protector of the realm but I.--
Break up the gates! I'll be your warrantize.
Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?
[Gloucester's men rush at the Tower gates, and
Woodville, the lieutenant, speaks within.]

WOODVILLE
What noise is this? What traitors have we here?

GLOUCESTER
Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
Open the gates. Here's Gloucester that would enter.

WOODVILLE
Have patience, noble duke, I may not open.
The Cardinal of Winchester forbids.
From him I have express commandment
That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.

GLOUCESTER
Fainthearted Woodville, prizest him 'fore me?
Arrogant Winchester, that haughty prelate
Whom Henry, our late sovereign, ne'er could brook?
Thou art no friend to God or to the King.
Open the gates, or I'll shut thee out shortly.

SERVINGMEN
Open the gates unto the Lord Protector,
Or we'll burst them open if that you come not quickly.

[Enter, to the Protector at the Tower gates, Winchester
in cardinal's robes and his men in tawny coats.]


WINCHESTER
How now, ambitious Humphrey, what means this?

GLOUCESTER
Peeled priest, dost thou command me to be shut out?

WINCHESTER
I do, thou most usurping proditor--
And not Protector--of the King or realm.

GLOUCESTER
Stand back, thou manifest conspirator,
Thou that contrived'st to murder our dead lord,
Thou that giv'st whores indulgences to sin!
I'll canvass thee in thy broad cardinal's hat
If thou proceed in this thy insolence.

WINCHESTER
Nay, stand thou back. I will not budge a foot.
This be Damascus; be thou cursed Cain
To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.

GLOUCESTER
I will not slay thee, but I'll drive thee back.
Thy scarlet robes, as a child's bearing-cloth,
I'll use to carry thee out of this place.

WINCHESTER
Do what thou dar'st, I beard thee to thy face.

GLOUCESTER
What, am I dared and bearded to my face?--
Draw, men, for all this privileged place.
Blue coats to tawny coats!	[All draw their swords.]
Priest, beware your beard.
I mean to tug it and to cuff you soundly.
Under my feet I'll stamp thy cardinal's hat;
In spite of pope or dignities of Church,
Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.

WINCHESTER
Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the Pope.

GLOUCESTER
Winchester goose, I cry "a rope, a rope!"--
Now beat them hence; why do you let them stay?--
Thee I'll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep's array.--
Out, tawny coats, out, scarlet hypocrite!

[Here Gloucester's men beat out the Cardinal's men,
and enter in the hurly-burly the Mayor of London
and his Officers.]


MAYOR
Fie, lords, that you, being supreme magistrates,
Thus contumeliously should break the peace!

GLOUCESTER
Peace, Mayor? Thou know'st little of my wrongs.
Here's Beaufort, that regards nor God nor king,
Hath here distrained the Tower to his use.

WINCHESTER
Here's Gloucester, a foe to citizens,
One that still motions war and never peace,
O'ercharging your free purses with large fines;
That seeks to overthrow religion
Because he is Protector of the realm,
And would have armor here out of the Tower
To crown himself king and suppress the Prince.

GLOUCESTER
I will not answer thee with words, but blows.
[Here they skirmish again.]

MAYOR
Naught rests for me in this tumultuous strife
But to make open proclamation.
Come, officer, as loud as e'er thou canst, cry.
[He hands an Officer a paper.]

OFFICER [reads]  All manner of men, assembled here in
arms this day against God's peace and the King's, we
charge and command you, in his Highness' name, to
repair to your several dwelling places, and not to
wear, handle, or use any sword, weapon, or dagger
henceforward, upon pain of death.

GLOUCESTER
Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law,
But we shall meet and break our minds at large.

WINCHESTER
Gloucester, we'll meet to thy cost, be sure.
Thy heartblood I will have for this day's work.

MAYOR
I'll call for clubs if you will not away.
[(Aside.)] This cardinal's more haughty than the devil!

GLOUCESTER
Mayor, farewell. Thou dost but what thou mayst.

WINCHESTER
Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head,
For I intend to have it ere long.
[Gloucester and Winchester exit
at separate doors, with their Servingmen.]

MAYOR, [to Officers]
See the coast cleared, and then we will depart.
[(Aside.)] Good God, these nobles should such
stomachs bear!
I myself fight not once in forty year.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter the Master Gunner of Orleance and his Boy.]


MASTER GUNNER
Sirrah, thou know'st how Orleance is besieged
And how the English have the suburbs won.

BOY
Father, I know, and oft have shot at them;
Howe'er, unfortunate, I missed my aim.

MASTER GUNNER
But now thou shalt not. Be thou ruled by me.
Chief master-gunner am I of this town;
Something I must do to procure me grace.
The Prince's espials have informed me
How the English, in the suburbs close entrenched,
Went through a secret grate of iron bars
In yonder tower, to overpeer the city,
And thence discover how with most advantage
They may vex us with shot or with assault.
To intercept this inconvenience,
A piece of ordnance 'gainst it I have placed,
And even these three days have I watched
If I could see them. Now do thou watch,
For I can stay no longer.
If thou spy'st any, run and bring me word;
And thou shalt find me at the Governor's.	[He exits.]

BOY
Father, I warrant you, take you no care;
I'll never trouble you if I may spy them.	[He exits.]

[Enter Salisbury and Talbot on the turrets,
with Sir William Glansdale, Sir Thomas Gargrave,
Attendants and Others.]


SALISBURY
Talbot, my life, my joy, again returned!
How wert thou handled, being prisoner?
Or by what means gott'st thou to be released?
Discourse, I prithee, on this turret's top.

TALBOT
The Duke of Bedford had a prisoner
Called the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles;
For him was I exchanged and ransomed.
But with a baser man-of-arms by far
Once in contempt they would have bartered me,
Which I disdaining, scorned, and craved death
Rather than I would be so vile-esteemed.
In fine, redeemed I was as I desired.
But O, the treacherous Fastolf wounds my heart,
Whom with my bare fists I would execute
If I now had him brought into my power.

SALISBURY
Yet tell'st thou not how thou wert entertained.

TALBOT
With scoffs and scorns and contumelious taunts.
In open marketplace produced they me
To be a public spectacle to all.
"Here," said they, "is the terror of the French,
The scarecrow that affrights our children so."
Then broke I from the officers that led me,
And with my nails digged stones out of the ground
To hurl at the beholders of my shame.
My grisly countenance made others fly;
None durst come near for fear of sudden death.
In iron walls they deemed me not secure:
So great fear of my name 'mongst them were spread
That they supposed I could rend bars of steel
And spurn in pieces posts of adamant.
Wherefore a guard of chosen shot I had
That walked about me every minute-while;
And if I did but stir out of my bed,
Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.

[Enter the Boy with a linstock.
He crosses the main stage and exits.]



SALISBURY
I grieve to hear what torments you endured,
But we will be revenged sufficiently.
Now it is supper time in Orleance.
Here, through this grate, I count each one
And view the Frenchmen how they fortify.
Let us look in; the sight will much delight thee.
Sir Thomas Gargrave and Sir William Glansdale,
Let me have your express opinions
Where is best place to make our batt'ry next?

GARGRAVE
I think at the north gate, for there stands lords.

GLANSDALE
And I, here, at the bulwark of the bridge.

TALBOT
For aught I see, this city must be famished
Or with light skirmishes enfeebled.
[Here they shoot, and Salisbury
and Gargrave fall down.]

SALISBURY
O Lord, have mercy on us, wretched sinners!

GARGRAVE
O Lord, have mercy on me, woeful man!

TALBOT
What chance is this that suddenly hath crossed us?--
Speak, Salisbury--at least if thou canst, speak!
How far'st thou, mirror of all martial men?
One of thy eyes and thy cheek's side struck off!--
Accursed tower, accursed fatal hand
That hath contrived this woeful tragedy!
In thirteen battles Salisbury o'ercame;
Henry the Fifth he first trained to the wars.
Whilst any trump did sound or drum struck up,
His sword did ne'er leave striking in the field.--
Yet liv'st thou, Salisbury? Though thy speech doth fail,
One eye thou hast to look to heaven for grace.
The sun with one eye vieweth all the world.
Heaven, be thou gracious to none alive
If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands!--
Sir Thomas Gargrave, hast thou any life?
Speak unto Talbot. Nay, look up to him.--
Bear hence his body; I will help to bury it.
[Attendants exit with body of Gargrave.]
Salisbury, cheer thy spirit with this comfort,
Thou shalt not die whiles--
He beckons with his hand and smiles on me
As who should say "When I am dead and gone,
Remember to avenge me on the French."
Plantagenet, I will; and, like thee, Nero,
Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn.
Wretched shall France be only in my name.
[Here an alarum, and it thunders and lightens.]
What stir is this? What tumult's in the heavens?
Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
My lord, my lord, the French have gathered head.
The Dauphin, with one Joan la Pucelle joined,
A holy prophetess new risen up,
Is come with a great power to raise the siege.
[Here Salisbury lifteth himself up and groans.]

TALBOT
Hear, hear, how dying Salisbury doth groan;
It irks his heart he cannot be revenged.
Frenchmen, I'll be a Salisbury to you.
Pucelle or puzel, dauphin or dogfish,
Your hearts I'll stamp out with my horse's heels
And make a quagmire of your mingled brains.
Convey we Salisbury into his tent,
And then try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.
[Alarum. They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Here an alarum again, and Talbot pursueth the
Dauphin and driveth him; then enter Joan la Pucelle,
driving Englishmen before her. They cross the stage
and exit. Then enter Talbot.]


TALBOT
Where is my strength, my valor, and my force?
Our English troops retire; I cannot stay them.
A woman clad in armor chaseth them.

[Enter Pucelle, with Soldiers.]

Here, here she comes!--I'll have a bout with thee.
Devil or devil's dam, I'll conjure thee.
Blood will I draw on thee--thou art a witch--
And straightway give thy soul to him thou serv'st.

PUCELLE
Come, come; 'tis only I that must disgrace thee.
[Here they fight.]

TALBOT
Heavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail?
My breast I'll burst with straining of my courage,
And from my shoulders crack my arms asunder,
But I will chastise this high-minded strumpet.
[They fight again.]

PUCELLE
Talbot, farewell. Thy hour is not yet come.
I must go victual Orleance forthwith.
[A short alarum. Then she prepares to
enter the town with Soldiers.]
O'ertake me if thou canst. I scorn thy strength.
Go, go, cheer up thy hunger-starved men.
Help Salisbury to make his testament.
This day is ours, as many more shall be.
[She exits with Soldiers.]

TALBOT
My thoughts are whirled like a potter's wheel.
I know not where I am nor what I do.
A witch by fear--not force, like Hannibal--
Drives back our troops, and conquers as she lists.
So bees with smoke and doves with noisome stench
Are from their hives and houses driven away.
They called us, for our fierceness, English dogs;
Now like to whelps we crying run away.

[A short alarum. Enter English soldiers,
chased by French soldiers.]

Hark, countrymen, either renew the fight,
Or tear the lions out of England's coat.
Renounce your soil; give sheep in lions' stead.
Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf,
Or horse or oxen from the leopard,
As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.
[Alarum. Here another skirmish.]
It will not be! Retire into your trenches.
You all consented unto Salisbury's death,
For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.
Pucelle is entered into Orleance
In spite of us or aught that we could do.
[Soldiers exit.]
O, would I were to die with Salisbury!
The shame hereof will make me hide my head.
[Talbot exits. Alarum. Retreat.]

Scene 6
=======
[Flourish. Enter on the walls Pucelle, Charles the
Dauphin, Reignier, Alanson, and Soldiers.]


PUCELLE
Advance our waving colors on the walls.
Rescued is Orleance from the English.
Thus Joan la Pucelle hath performed her word.
[She exits.]

CHARLES
Divinest creature, Astraea's daughter,
How shall I honor thee for this success?
Thy promises are like Adonis' garden
That one day bloomed and fruitful were the next.
France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess.
Recovered is the town of Orleance.
More blessed hap did ne'er befall our state.

REIGNIER
Why ring not bells aloud throughout the town?
Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires
And feast and banquet in the open streets
To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.

ALANSON
All France will be replete with mirth and joy
When they shall hear how we have played the men.

CHARLES
'Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won;
For which I will divide my crown with her,
And all the priests and friars in my realm
Shall in procession sing her endless praise.
A statelier pyramis to her I'll rear
Than Rhodophe's of Memphis ever was.
In memory of her, when she is dead,
Her ashes, in an urn more precious
Than the rich-jeweled coffer of Darius,
Transported shall be at high festivals
Before the kings and queens of France.
No longer on Saint Dennis will we cry,
But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint.
Come in, and let us banquet royally
After this golden day of victory.
[Flourish. They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter on the walls a French Sergeant of a Band,
with two Sentinels.]


SERGEANT
Sirs, take your places and be vigilant.
If any noise or soldier you perceive
Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.

SENTINEL
Sergeant, you shall.	[Sergeant exits.]
Thus are poor servitors,
When others sleep upon their quiet beds,
Constrained to watch in darkness, rain, and cold.

[Enter Talbot, Bedford, and Burgundy, below,
with scaling ladders.]


TALBOT
Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
By whose approach the regions of Artois,
Walloon, and Picardy are friends to us,
This happy night the Frenchmen are secure,
Having all day caroused and banqueted.
Embrace we then this opportunity,
As fitting best to quittance their deceit
Contrived by art and baleful sorcery.

BEDFORD
Coward of France, how much he wrongs his fame,
Despairing of his own arm's fortitude,
To join with witches and the help of hell!

BURGUNDY
Traitors have never other company.
But what's that Pucelle whom they term so pure?

TALBOT
A maid, they say.

BEDFORD  A maid? And be so martial?

BURGUNDY
Pray God she prove not masculine ere long,
If underneath the standard of the French
She carry armor as she hath begun.

TALBOT
Well, let them practice and converse with spirits.
God is our fortress, in whose conquering name
Let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.

BEDFORD
Ascend, brave Talbot. We will follow thee.

TALBOT
Not all together. Better far, I guess,
That we do make our entrance several ways,
That if it chance the one of us do fail,
The other yet may rise against their force.

BEDFORD
Agreed. I'll to yond corner.

BURGUNDY  And I to this.

TALBOT
And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave.
Now, Salisbury, for thee and for the right
Of English Henry, shall this night appear
How much in duty I am bound to both.
[Scaling the walls, they cry
"Saint George! A Talbot!"]

SENTINEL
Arm, arm! The enemy doth make assault.
[The English, pursuing the Sentinels, exit aloft.]
[The French leap o'er the walls in their shirts.]

[Enter several ways, Bastard, Alanson, Reignier,
half ready, and half unready.]


ALANSON
How now, my lords? What, all unready so?

BASTARD
Unready? Ay, and glad we scaped so well.

REIGNIER
'Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds,
Hearing alarums at our chamber doors.

ALANSON
Of all exploits since first I followed arms
Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterprise
More venturous or desperate than this.

BASTARD
I think this Talbot be a fiend of hell.

REIGNIER
If not of hell, the heavens sure favor him.

ALANSON
Here cometh Charles. I marvel how he sped.

[Enter Charles and Joan la Pucelle.]


BASTARD
Tut, holy Joan was his defensive guard.

CHARLES
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame?
Didst thou at first, to flatter us withal,
Make us partakers of a little gain
That now our loss might be ten times so much?

PUCELLE
Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend?
At all times will you have my power alike?
Sleeping or waking, must I still prevail,
Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?--
Improvident soldiers, had your watch been good,
This sudden mischief never could have fall'n.

CHARLES
Duke of Alanson, this was your default,
That, being captain of the watch tonight,
Did look no better to that weighty charge.

ALANSON
Had all your quarters been as safely kept
As that whereof I had the government,
We had not been thus shamefully surprised.

BASTARD
Mine was secure.

REIGNIER  And so was mine, my lord.

CHARLES
And for myself, most part of all this night
Within her quarter and mine own precinct
I was employed in passing to and fro
About relieving of the sentinels.
Then how or which way should they first break in?

PUCELLE
Question, my lords, no further of the case,
How or which way; 'tis sure they found some place
But weakly guarded, where the breach was made.
And now there rests no other shift but this:
To gather our soldiers, scattered and dispersed,
And lay new platforms to endamage them.

[Alarum. Enter an English Soldier, crying,
"A Talbot, A Talbot!" The French fly,
leaving their clothes behind.]


SOLDIER
I'll be so bold to take what they have left.
The cry of "Talbot" serves me for a sword,
For I have loaden me with many spoils,
Using no other weapon but his name.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Talbot, Bedford, Burgundy, a Captain and Others.]


BEDFORD
The day begins to break and night is fled,
Whose pitchy mantle over-veiled the Earth.
Here sound retreat and cease our hot pursuit.
[Retreat sounded.]

TALBOT
Bring forth the body of old Salisbury,
And here advance it in the marketplace,
The middle center of this cursed town.

[Soldiers enter bearing the body of Salisbury,
Drums beating a dead march.]

Now have I paid my vow unto his soul:
For every drop of blood was drawn from him
There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight.
And, that hereafter ages may behold
What ruin happened in revenge of him,
Within their chiefest temple I'll erect
A tomb wherein his corpse shall be interred,
Upon the which, that everyone may read,
Shall be engraved the sack of Orleance,
The treacherous manner of his mournful death,
And what a terror he had been to France.
[Funeral exits.]
But, lords, in all our bloody massacre,
I muse we met not with the Dauphin's grace,
His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc,
Nor any of his false confederates.

BEDFORD
'Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began,
Roused on the sudden from their drowsy beds,
They did amongst the troops of armed men
Leap o'er the walls for refuge in the field.

BURGUNDY
Myself, as far as I could well discern
For smoke and dusky vapors of the night,
Am sure I scared the Dauphin and his trull,
When arm-in-arm they both came swiftly running,
Like to a pair of loving turtledoves
That could not live asunder day or night.
After that things are set in order here,
We'll follow them with all the power we have.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
All hail, my lords. Which of this princely train
Call you the warlike Talbot, for his acts
So much applauded through the realm of France?

TALBOT
Here is the Talbot. Who would speak with him?

MESSENGER
The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne,
With modesty admiring thy renown,
By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafe
To visit her poor castle where she lies,
That she may boast she hath beheld the man
Whose glory fills the world with loud report.

BURGUNDY
Is it even so? Nay, then, I see our wars
Will turn unto a peaceful comic sport,
When ladies crave to be encountered with.
You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit.

TALBOT
Ne'er trust me, then; for when a world of men
Could not prevail with all their oratory,
Yet hath a woman's kindness overruled.--
And therefore tell her I return great thanks,
And in submission will attend on her.--
Will not your Honors bear me company?

BEDFORD
No, truly, 'tis more than manners will;
And I have heard it said unbidden guests
Are often welcomest when they are gone.

TALBOT
Well then, alone, since there's no remedy,
I mean to prove this lady's courtesy.--
Come hither, captain.	[Whispers.]
You perceive my mind?

CAPTAIN
I do, my lord, and mean accordingly.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Countess of Auvergne, with Porter.]


COUNTESS
Porter, remember what I gave in charge,
And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.

PORTER  Madam, I will.	[He exits.]

COUNTESS
The plot is laid. If all things fall out right,
I shall as famous be by this exploit
As Scythian Tamyris by Cyrus' death.
Great is the rumor of this dreadful knight,
And his achievements of no less account.
Fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears
To give their censure of these rare reports.

[Enter Messenger and Talbot.]


MESSENGER
Madam, according as your Ladyship desired,
By message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.

COUNTESS
And he is welcome. What, is this the man?

MESSENGER
Madam, it is.

COUNTESS  Is this the scourge of France?
Is this the Talbot, so much feared abroad
That with his name the mothers still their babes?
I see report is fabulous and false.
I thought I should have seen some Hercules,
A second Hector, for his grim aspect
And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs.
Alas, this is a child, a silly dwarf!
It cannot be this weak and writhled shrimp
Should strike such terror to his enemies.

TALBOT
Madam, I have been bold to trouble you.
But since your Ladyship is not at leisure,
I'll sort some other time to visit you.
[He begins to exit.]

COUNTESS, [to Messenger]
What means he now? Go ask him whither he goes.

MESSENGER
Stay, my Lord Talbot, for my lady craves
To know the cause of your abrupt departure.

TALBOT
Marry, for that she's in a wrong belief,
I go to certify her Talbot's here.

[Enter Porter with keys.]


COUNTESS, [to Talbot]
If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.

TALBOT
Prisoner? To whom?

COUNTESS  To me, bloodthirsty lord.
And for that cause I trained thee to my house.
Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,
For in my gallery thy picture hangs.
But now the substance shall endure the like,
And I will chain these legs and arms of thine,
That hast by tyranny these many years
Wasted our country, slain our citizens,
And sent our sons and husbands captivate.

TALBOT  Ha, ha, ha!

COUNTESS
Laughest thou, wretch? Thy mirth shall turn to moan.

TALBOT
I laugh to see your Ladyship so fond
To think that you have aught but Talbot's shadow
Whereon to practice your severity.

COUNTESS  Why, art not thou the man?

TALBOT  I am, indeed.

COUNTESS  Then have I substance too.

TALBOT
No, no, I am but shadow of myself.
You are deceived; my substance is not here,
For what you see is but the smallest part
And least proportion of humanity.
I tell you, madam, were the whole frame here,
It is of such a spacious lofty pitch
Your roof were not sufficient to contain 't.

COUNTESS
This is a riddling merchant for the nonce:
He will be here and yet he is not here.
How can these contrarieties agree?

TALBOT
That will I show you presently.
[Winds his horn. Drums strike up;
a peal of ordnance.]

[Enter Soldiers.]

How say you, madam? Are you now persuaded
That Talbot is but shadow of himself?
These are his substance, sinews, arms, and strength,
With which he yoketh your rebellious necks,
Razeth your cities, and subverts your towns,
And in a moment makes them desolate.

COUNTESS
Victorious Talbot, pardon my abuse.
I find thou art no less than fame hath bruited,
And more than may be gathered by thy shape.
Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath,
For I am sorry that with reverence
I did not entertain thee as thou art.

TALBOT
Be not dismayed, fair lady, nor misconster
The mind of Talbot as you did mistake
The outward composition of his body.
What you have done hath not offended me,
Nor other satisfaction do I crave
But only, with your patience, that we may
Taste of your wine and see what cates you have,
For soldiers' stomachs always serve them well.

COUNTESS
With all my heart, and think me honored
To feast so great a warrior in my house.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Richard Plantagenet, Warwick, Somerset,
William de la Pole the Earl of Suffolk,
Vernon, a Lawyer, and Others.]


PLANTAGENET
Great lords and gentlemen, what means this silence?
Dare no man answer in a case of truth?

SUFFOLK
Within the Temple Hall we were too loud;
The garden here is more convenient.

PLANTAGENET
Then say at once if I maintained the truth,
Or else was wrangling Somerset in th' error?

SUFFOLK
Faith, I have been a truant in the law
And never yet could frame my will to it,
And therefore frame the law unto my will.

SOMERSET
Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.

WARWICK
Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch,
Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth,
Between two blades, which bears the better temper,
Between two horses, which doth bear him best,
Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye,
I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgment;
But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,
Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.

PLANTAGENET
Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance!
The truth appears so naked on my side
That any purblind eye may find it out.

SOMERSET
And on my side it is so well appareled,
So clear, so shining, and so evident,
That it will glimmer through a blind man's eye.

PLANTAGENET
Since you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak,
In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts:
Let him that is a trueborn gentleman
And stands upon the honor of his birth,
If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.

SOMERSET
Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,
But dare maintain the party of the truth,
Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.

WARWICK
I love no colors; and, without all color
Of base insinuating flattery,
I pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.

SUFFOLK
I pluck this red rose with young Somerset,
And say withal I think he held the right.

VERNON
Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more
Till you conclude that he upon whose side
The fewest roses are cropped from the tree
Shall yield the other in the right opinion.

SOMERSET
Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:
If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.

PLANTAGENET  And I.

VERNON
Then for the truth and plainness of the case,
I pluck this pale and maiden blossom here,
Giving my verdict on the white rose side.

SOMERSET
Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
Lest, bleeding, you do paint the white rose red,
And fall on my side so against your will.

VERNON
If I, my lord, for my opinion bleed,
Opinion shall be surgeon to my hurt
And keep me on the side where still I am.

SOMERSET  Well, well, come on, who else?

LAWYER
Unless my study and my books be false,
The argument you held was wrong in law,
In sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.

PLANTAGENET
Now, Somerset, where is your argument?

SOMERSET
Here in my scabbard, meditating that
Shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.

PLANTAGENET
Meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses,
For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
The truth on our side.

SOMERSET  No, Plantagenet.
'Tis not for fear, but anger that thy cheeks
Blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses,
And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.

PLANTAGENET
Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?

SOMERSET
Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet?

PLANTAGENET
Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth,
Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.

SOMERSET
Well, I'll find friends to wear my bleeding roses
That shall maintain what I have said is true,
Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.

PLANTAGENET
Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,
I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.

SUFFOLK
Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.

PLANTAGENET
Proud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.

SUFFOLK
I'll turn my part thereof into thy throat.

SOMERSET
Away, away, good William de la Pole!
We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.

WARWICK
Now, by God's will, thou wrong'st him, Somerset.
His grandfather was Lionel, Duke of Clarence,
Third son to the third Edward, King of England.
Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?

PLANTAGENET
He bears him on the place's privilege,
Or durst not for his craven heart say thus.

SOMERSET
By Him that made me, I'll maintain my words
On any plot of ground in Christendom.
Was not thy father Richard, Earl of Cambridge,
For treason executed in our late king's days?
And, by his treason, stand'st not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?
His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood,
And, till thou be restored, thou art a yeoman.

PLANTAGENET
My father was attached, not attainted,
Condemned to die for treason, but no traitor;
And that I'll prove on better men than Somerset,
Were growing time once ripened to my will.
For your partaker Pole and you yourself,
I'll note you in my book of memory
To scourge you for this apprehension.
Look to it well, and say you are well warned.

SOMERSET
Ah, thou shalt find us ready for thee still,
And know us by these colors for thy foes,
For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.

PLANTAGENET
And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,
As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,
Will I forever, and my faction, wear
Until it wither with me to my grave
Or flourish to the height of my degree.

SUFFOLK
Go forward, and be choked with thy ambition!
And so farewell, until I meet thee next.	[He exits.]

SOMERSET
Have with thee, Pole.--Farewell, ambitious Richard.
[He exits.]

PLANTAGENET
How I am braved, and must perforce endure it!

WARWICK
This blot that they object against your house
Shall be whipped out in the next parliament,
Called for the truce of Winchester and Gloucester;
And if thou be not then created York,
I will not live to be accounted Warwick.
Meantime, in signal of my love to thee,
Against proud Somerset and William Pole
Will I upon thy party wear this rose.
And here I prophesy: this brawl today,
Grown to this faction in the Temple garden,
Shall send, between the red rose and the white,
A thousand souls to death and deadly night.

PLANTAGENET
Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you,
That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.

VERNON
In your behalf still will I wear the same.

LAWYER
And so will I.

PLANTAGENET  Thanks, gentle sir.
Come, let us four to dinner. I dare say
This quarrel will drink blood another day.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Edmund Mortimer, brought in a chair,
and Jailers.]


MORTIMER
Kind keepers of my weak decaying age,
Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.
Even like a man new-haled from the rack,
So fare my limbs with long imprisonment;
And these gray locks, the pursuivants of death,
Nestor-like aged in an age of care,
Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer;
These eyes, like lamps whose wasting oil is spent,
Wax dim, as drawing to their exigent;
Weak shoulders, overborne with burdening grief,
And pithless arms, like to a withered vine
That droops his sapless branches to the ground;
Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb,
Unable to support this lump of clay,
Swift-winged with desire to get a grave,
As witting I no other comfort have.
But tell me, keeper, will my nephew come?

KEEPER
Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come.
We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber,
And answer was returned that he will come.

MORTIMER
Enough. My soul shall then be satisfied.
Poor gentleman, his wrong doth equal mine.
Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,
Before whose glory I was great in arms,
This loathsome sequestration have I had;
And even since then hath Richard been obscured,
Deprived of honor and inheritance.
But now the arbitrator of despairs,
Just Death, kind umpire of men's miseries,
With sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence.
I would his troubles likewise were expired,
That so he might recover what was lost.

[Enter Richard Plantagenet.]


KEEPER
My lord, your loving nephew now is come.

MORTIMER
Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?

PLANTAGENET
Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used,
Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.

MORTIMER, [to Jailer]
Direct mine arms I may embrace his neck
And in his bosom spend my latter gasp.
O, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks,
That I may kindly give one fainting kiss.
[He embraces Richard.]
And now declare, sweet stem from York's great stock,
Why didst thou say of late thou wert despised?

PLANTAGENET
First, lean thine aged back against mine arm,
And in that ease I'll tell thee my disease.
This day, in argument upon a case,
Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me,
Among which terms he used his lavish tongue
And did upbraid me with my father's death;
Which obloquy set bars before my tongue,
Else with the like I had requited him.
Therefore, good uncle, for my father's sake,
In honor of a true Plantagenet,
And for alliance' sake, declare the cause
My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.

MORTIMER
That cause, fair nephew, that imprisoned me
And hath detained me all my flow'ring youth
Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine,
Was cursed instrument of his decease.

PLANTAGENET
Discover more at large what cause that was,
For I am ignorant and cannot guess.

MORTIMER
I will, if that my fading breath permit
And death approach not ere my tale be done.
Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king,
Deposed his nephew Richard, Edward's son,
The first begotten and the lawful heir
Of Edward king, the third of that descent;
During whose reign the Percies of the north,
Finding his usurpation most unjust,
Endeavored my advancement to the throne.
The reason moved these warlike lords to this
Was, for that--young Richard thus removed,
Leaving no heir begotten of his body--
I was the next by birth and parentage;
For by my mother I derived am
From Lionel, Duke of Clarence, third son
To King Edward the Third; whereas he
From John of Gaunt doth bring his pedigree,
Being but fourth of that heroic line.
But mark: as in this haughty great attempt
They labored to plant the rightful heir,
I lost my liberty and they their lives.
Long after this, when Henry the Fifth,
Succeeding his father Bolingbroke, did reign,
Thy father, Earl of Cambridge then, derived
From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York,
Marrying my sister that thy mother was,
Again, in pity of my hard distress,
Levied an army, weening to redeem
And have installed me in the diadem.
But, as the rest, so fell that noble earl
And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
In whom the title rested, were suppressed.

PLANTAGENET
Of which, my lord, your Honor is the last.

MORTIMER
True, and thou seest that I no issue have
And that my fainting words do warrant death.
Thou art my heir; the rest I wish thee gather.
But yet be wary in thy studious care.

PLANTAGENET
Thy grave admonishments prevail with me.
But yet methinks my father's execution
Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.

MORTIMER
With silence, nephew, be thou politic;
Strong-fixed is the house of Lancaster,
And, like a mountain, not to be removed.
But now thy uncle is removing hence,
As princes do their courts when they are cloyed
With long continuance in a settled place.

PLANTAGENET
O uncle, would some part of my young years
Might but redeem the passage of your age.

MORTIMER
Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer doth
Which giveth many wounds when one will kill.
Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good;
Only give order for my funeral.
And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopes,
And prosperous be thy life in peace and war.
[Dies.]

PLANTAGENET
And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul.
In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage,
And like a hermit overpassed thy days.--
Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast,
And what I do imagine, let that rest.--
Keepers, convey him hence, and I myself
Will see his burial better than his life.
[Jailers exit carrying Mortimer's body.]
Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,
Choked with ambition of the meaner sort.
And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries,
Which Somerset hath offered to my house,
I doubt not but with honor to redress.
And therefore haste I to the Parliament,
Either to be restored to my blood,
Or make mine ill th' advantage of my good.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Flourish. Enter King Henry, Exeter, Gloucester, and
Winchester; Richard Plantagenet and Warwick,
with white roses; Somerset and Suffolk, with red
roses; and Others. Gloucester offers to put up a bill.
Winchester snatches it, tears it.]


WINCHESTER
Com'st thou with deep premeditated lines,
With written pamphlets studiously devised?
Humphrey of Gloucester, if thou canst accuse
Or aught intend'st to lay unto my charge,
Do it without invention, suddenly,
As I with sudden and extemporal speech
Purpose to answer what thou canst object.

GLOUCESTER
Presumptuous priest, this place commands my
patience,
Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonored me.
Think not, although in writing I preferred
The manner of thy vile outrageous crimes,
That therefore I have forged or am not able
Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen.
No, prelate, such is thy audacious wickedness,
Thy lewd, pestiferous, and dissentious pranks,
As very infants prattle of thy pride.
Thou art a most pernicious usurer,
Froward by nature, enemy to peace,
Lascivious, wanton, more than well beseems
A man of thy profession and degree.
And for thy treachery, what's more manifest,
In that thou laid'st a trap to take my life
As well at London Bridge as at the Tower?
Besides, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted,
The King, thy sovereign, is not quite exempt
From envious malice of thy swelling heart.

WINCHESTER
Gloucester, I do defy thee.--Lords, vouchsafe
To give me hearing what I shall reply.
If I were covetous, ambitious, or perverse,
As he will have me, how am I so poor?
Or how haps it I seek not to advance
Or raise myself, but keep my wonted calling?
And for dissension, who preferreth peace
More than I do, except I be provoked?
No, my good lords, it is not that offends;
It is not that that hath incensed the Duke.
It is because no one should sway but he,
No one but he should be about the King;
And that engenders thunder in his breast
And makes him roar these accusations forth.
But he shall know I am as good--

GLOUCESTER  As good!
Thou bastard of my grandfather!

WINCHESTER
Ay, lordly sir; for what are you, I pray,
But one imperious in another's throne?

GLOUCESTER
Am I not Protector, saucy priest?

WINCHESTER
And am not I a prelate of the Church?

GLOUCESTER
Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keeps,
And useth it to patronage his theft.

WINCHESTER
Unreverent Gloucester!

GLOUCESTER  Thou art reverend
Touching thy spiritual function, not thy life.

WINCHESTER
Rome shall remedy this.

GLOUCESTER  Roam thither then.

WARWICK, [to Winchester]
My lord, it were your duty to forbear.

SOMERSET
Ay, so the Bishop be not overborne.
Methinks my lord should be religious,
And know the office that belongs to such.

WARWICK
Methinks his Lordship should be humbler.
It fitteth not a prelate so to plead.

SOMERSET
Yes, when his holy state is touched so near.

WARWICK
State holy, or unhallowed, what of that?
Is not his Grace Protector to the King?

PLANTAGENET, [aside]
Plantagenet, I see, must hold his tongue,
Lest it be said "Speak, sirrah, when you should;
Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?"
Else would I have a fling at Winchester.

KING HENRY
Uncles of Gloucester and of Winchester,
The special watchmen of our English weal,
I would prevail, if prayers might prevail,
To join your hearts in love and amity.
O, what a scandal is it to our crown
That two such noble peers as you should jar!
Believe me, lords, my tender years can tell
Civil dissension is a viperous worm
That gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth.

[A noise within: "Down with the tawny coats!"]
What tumult 's this?

WARWICK  An uproar, I dare warrant,
Begun through malice of the Bishop's men.
[A noise again: "Stones! Stones!"]

[Enter Mayor.]


MAYOR
O, my good lords, and virtuous Henry,
Pity the city of London, pity us!
The Bishop and the Duke of Gloucester's men,
Forbidden late to carry any weapon,
Have filled their pockets full of pebble stones
And, banding themselves in contrary parts,
Do pelt so fast at one another's pate
That many have their giddy brains knocked out;
Our windows are broke down in every street,
And we, for fear, compelled to shut our shops.

[Enter Servingmen in skirmish with bloody pates.]


KING HENRY
We charge you, on allegiance to ourself,
To hold your slaught'ring hands and keep the peace.--
Pray, Uncle Gloucester, mitigate this strife.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Nay, if we be forbidden stones, we'll
fall to it with our teeth.

SECOND SERVINGMAN
Do what you dare, we are as
resolute.	[Skirmish again.]

GLOUCESTER
You of my household, leave this peevish broil,
And set this unaccustomed fight aside.

THIRD SERVINGMAN
My lord, we know your Grace to be a man
Just and upright, and, for your royal birth,
Inferior to none but to his Majesty;
And ere that we will suffer such a prince,
So kind a father of the commonweal,
To be disgraced by an inkhorn mate,
We and our wives and children all will fight
And have our bodies slaughtered by thy foes.

FIRST SERVINGMAN
Ay, and the very parings of our nails
Shall pitch a field when we are dead.
[Begin again.]

GLOUCESTER  Stay, stay, I say!
And if you love me, as you say you do,
Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.

KING HENRY
O, how this discord doth afflict my soul!
Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold
My sighs and tears, and will not once relent?
Who should be pitiful if you be not?
Or who should study to prefer a peace
If holy churchmen take delight in broils?

WARWICK
Yield, my Lord Protector--yield, Winchester--
Except you mean with obstinate repulse
To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.
You see what mischief, and what murder too,
Hath been enacted through your enmity.
Then be at peace, except you thirst for blood.

WINCHESTER
He shall submit, or I will never yield.

GLOUCESTER
Compassion on the King commands me stoop,
Or I would see his heart out ere the priest
Should ever get that privilege of me.

WARWICK
Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the Duke
Hath banished moody discontented fury,
As by his smoothed brows it doth appear.
Why look you still so stern and tragical?

GLOUCESTER
Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.
[Winchester refuses Gloucester's hand.]

KING HENRY
Fie, Uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preach
That malice was a great and grievous sin;
And will not you maintain the thing you teach,
But prove a chief offender in the same?

WARWICK
Sweet king! The Bishop hath a kindly gird.--
For shame, my Lord of Winchester, relent;
What, shall a child instruct you what to do?

WINCHESTER
Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee;
Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.
[They take each other's hand.]

GLOUCESTER, [aside]
Ay, but I fear me with a hollow heart.--
See here, my friends and loving countrymen,
This token serveth for a flag of truce
Betwixt ourselves and all our followers,
So help me God, as I dissemble not.

WINCHESTER, [aside]
So help me God, as I intend it not.

KING HENRY
O, loving uncle--kind Duke of Gloucester--
How joyful am I made by this contract.
[To the Servingmen.] Away, my masters, trouble us
no more,
But join in friendship as your lords have done.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Content. I'll to the surgeon's.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  And so will I.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  And I will see what physic the tavern
affords.
[They exit with Mayor and Others.]

WARWICK, [presenting a scroll]
Accept this scroll, most gracious sovereign,
Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet
We do exhibit to your Majesty.

GLOUCESTER
Well urged, my Lord of Warwick.--For, sweet prince,
An if your Grace mark every circumstance,
You have great reason to do Richard right,
Especially for those occasions
At Eltham Place I told your Majesty.

KING HENRY
And those occasions, uncle, were of force.--
Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure is
That Richard be restored to his blood.

WARWICK
Let Richard be restored to his blood;
So shall his father's wrongs be recompensed.

WINCHESTER
As will the rest, so willeth Winchester.

KING HENRY
If Richard will be true, not that alone
But all the whole inheritance I give
That doth belong unto the house of York,
From whence you spring by lineal descent.

PLANTAGENET
Thy humble servant vows obedience
And humble service till the point of death.

KING HENRY
Stoop then, and set your knee against my foot;
[Plantagenet kneels.]
And in reguerdon of that duty done
I girt thee with the valiant sword of York.
Rise, Richard, like a true Plantagenet,
And rise created princely Duke of York.

YORK, [formerly PLANTAGENET, standing]
And so thrive Richard as thy foes may fall!
And as my duty springs, so perish they
That grudge one thought against your Majesty.

ALL
Welcome, high prince, the mighty Duke of York.

SOMERSET, [aside]
Perish, base prince, ignoble Duke of York.

GLOUCESTER
Now will it best avail your Majesty
To cross the seas and to be crowned in France.
The presence of a king engenders love
Amongst his subjects and his loyal friends,
As it disanimates his enemies.

KING HENRY
When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes,
For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.

GLOUCESTER
Your ships already are in readiness.
[Sennet. Flourish. All but Exeter exit.]

EXETER
Ay, we may march in England or in France,
Not seeing what is likely to ensue.
This late dissension grown betwixt the peers
Burns under feigned ashes of forged love
And will at last break out into a flame.
As festered members rot but by degree
Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,
So will this base and envious discord breed.
And now I fear that fatal prophecy
Which in the time of Henry named the Fifth
Was in the mouth of every sucking babe:
That Henry born at Monmouth should win all,
And Henry born at Windsor should lose all,
Which is so plain that Exeter doth wish
His days may finish ere that hapless time.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Pucelle disguised, with four Soldiers with sacks
upon their backs.]


PUCELLE
These are the city gates, the gates of Roan,
Through which our policy must make a breach.
Take heed. Be wary how you place your words;
Talk like the vulgar sort of market men
That come to gather money for their corn.
If we have entrance, as I hope we shall,
And that we find the slothful watch but weak,
I'll by a sign give notice to our friends,
That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.

SOLDIER
Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,
And we be lords and rulers over Roan;
Therefore we'll knock.
[Knock.]

WATCH, [within]
Qui la?

PUCELLE  Paysans la pauvre gens de France:
Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.

WATCH
Enter, go in. The market bell is rung.

PUCELLE, [aside]
Now, Roan, I'll shake thy bulwarks to the ground.
[They exit.]

[Enter Charles, Bastard, Alanson, Reignier,
and Soldiers.]


CHARLES
Saint Dennis bless this happy stratagem
And once again we'll sleep secure in Roan.

BASTARD
Here entered Pucelle and her practisants.
Now she is there, how will she specify
"Here is the best and safest passage in"?

REIGNIER
By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower,
Which, once discerned, shows that her meaning is:
No way to that, for weakness, which she entered.

[Enter Pucelle on the top, thrusting out a torch burning.]


PUCELLE
Behold, this is the happy wedding torch
That joineth Roan unto her countrymen,
But burning fatal to the Talbonites.

BASTARD
See, noble Charles, the beacon of our friend;
The burning torch, in yonder turret stands.

CHARLES
Now shine it like a comet of revenge,
A prophet to the fall of all our foes!

REIGNIER
Defer no time; delays have dangerous ends.
Enter and cry "The Dauphin!" presently,
And then do execution on the watch.
[Alarum. They exit.]

[An Alarum. Enter Talbot in an excursion.]


TALBOT
France, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears,
If Talbot but survive thy treachery.
Pucelle, that witch, that damned sorceress,
Hath wrought this hellish mischief unawares,
That hardly we escaped the pride of France.
[He exits.]

[An alarum. Excursions. Bedford brought in sick in
a chair, carried by two Attendants. Enter Talbot
and Burgundy without; within, Pucelle with a sack
of grain, Charles, Bastard, Alanson, and Reignier
on the walls.]


PUCELLE, [to those below]
Good morrow, gallants. Want you corn for bread?
[She scatters grain on those below.]
I think the Duke of Burgundy will fast
Before he'll buy again at such a rate.
'Twas full of darnel. Do you like the taste?

BURGUNDY
Scoff on, vile fiend and shameless courtesan!
I trust ere long to choke thee with thine own,
And make thee curse the harvest of that corn.

CHARLES
Your Grace may starve, perhaps, before that time.

BEDFORD
O, let no words, but deeds, revenge this treason.

PUCELLE
What will you do, good graybeard? Break a lance
And run a-tilt at Death within a chair?

TALBOT
Foul fiend of France and hag of all despite,
Encompassed with thy lustful paramours,
Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age
And twit with cowardice a man half dead?
Damsel, I'll have a bout with you again,
Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.

PUCELLE
Are you so hot, sir? Yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace,
If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.
[Those below whisper together in council.]
God speed the Parliament! Who shall be the Speaker?

TALBOT
Dare you come forth and meet us in the field?

PUCELLE
Belike your Lordship takes us then for fools,
To try if that our own be ours or no.

TALBOT
I speak not to that railing Hecate,
But unto thee, Alanson, and the rest.
Will you, like soldiers, come and fight it out?

ALANSON  Seigneur, no.

TALBOT
Seigneur, hang! Base muleteers of France,
Like peasant footboys do they keep the walls
And dare not take up arms like gentlemen.

PUCELLE
Away, captains. Let's get us from the walls,
For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.--
Goodbye, my lord. We came but to tell you
That we are here.	[They exit from the walls.]

TALBOT
And there will we be too, ere it be long,
Or else reproach be Talbot's greatest fame.--
Vow, Burgundy, by honor of thy house,
Pricked on by public wrongs sustained in France,
Either to get the town again or die.
And I, as sure as English Henry lives,
And as his father here was conqueror,
As sure as in this late-betrayed town
Great Coeur-de-lion's heart was buried,
So sure I swear to get the town or die.

BURGUNDY
My vows are equal partners with thy vows.

TALBOT
But, ere we go, regard this dying prince,
The valiant Duke of Bedford.--Come, my lord,
We will bestow you in some better place,
Fitter for sickness and for crazy age.

BEDFORD
Lord Talbot, do not so dishonor me.
Here will I sit, before the walls of Roan,
And will be partner of your weal or woe.

BURGUNDY
Courageous Bedford, let us now persuade you--

BEDFORD
Not to be gone from hence, for once I read
That stout Pendragon, in his litter sick,
Came to the field and vanquished his foes.
Methinks I should revive the soldiers' hearts
Because I ever found them as myself.

TALBOT
Undaunted spirit in a dying breast,
Then be it so. Heavens keep old Bedford safe!--
And now no more ado, brave Burgundy,
But gather we our forces out of hand
And set upon our boasting enemy.
[He exits with Burgundy.
Bedford and Attendants remain.]

[An alarum. Excursions. Enter Sir John Fastolf
and a Captain.]


CAPTAIN
Whither away, Sir John Fastolf, in such haste?

FASTOLF
Whither away? To save myself by flight.
We are like to have the overthrow again.

CAPTAIN
What, will you fly and leave Lord Talbot?

FASTOLF  Ay,
All the Talbots in the world, to save my life.
[He exits.]

CAPTAIN
Cowardly knight, ill fortune follow thee.
[He exits.]

[Retreat. Excursions. Pucelle, Alanson, and Charles
enter, pursued by English Soldiers, and fly.]


BEDFORD
Now, quiet soul, depart when heaven please,
For I have seen our enemies' overthrow.
What is the trust or strength of foolish man?
They that of late were daring with their scoffs
Are glad and fain by flight to save themselves.
[Bedford dies, and is carried
in by two in his chair.]

[An alarum. Enter Talbot, Burgundy, and the rest.]


TALBOT
Lost and recovered in a day again!
This is a double honor, Burgundy.
Yet heavens have glory for this victory.

BURGUNDY
Warlike and martial Talbot, Burgundy
Enshrines thee in his heart, and there erects
Thy noble deeds as valor's monuments.

TALBOT
Thanks, gentle duke. But where is Pucelle now?
I think her old familiar is asleep.
Now where's the Bastard's braves and Charles his
gleeks?
What, all amort? Roan hangs her head for grief
That such a valiant company are fled.
Now will we take some order in the town,
Placing therein some expert officers,
And then depart to Paris to the King,
For there young Henry with his nobles lie.

BURGUNDY
What wills Lord Talbot pleaseth Burgundy.

TALBOT
But yet, before we go, let's not forget
The noble Duke of Bedford late-deceased,
But see his exequies fulfilled in Roan.
A braver soldier never couched lance,
A gentler heart did never sway in court.
But kings and mightiest potentates must die,
For that's the end of human misery.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Charles, Bastard, Alanson, Pucelle, and Soldiers.]


PUCELLE
Dismay not, princes, at this accident,
Nor grieve that Roan is so recovered.
Care is no cure, but rather corrosive
For things that are not to be remedied.
Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while,
And like a peacock sweep along his tail;
We'll pull his plumes and take away his train,
If dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.

CHARLES
We have been guided by thee hitherto,
And of thy cunning had no diffidence.
One sudden foil shall never breed distrust.

BASTARD, [to Pucelle]
Search out thy wit for secret policies,
And we will make thee famous through the world.

ALANSON, [to Pucelle]
We'll set thy statue in some holy place
And have thee reverenced like a blessed saint.
Employ thee then, sweet virgin, for our good.

PUCELLE
Then thus it must be; this doth Joan devise:
By fair persuasions mixed with sugared words
We will entice the Duke of Burgundy
To leave the Talbot and to follow us.

CHARLES
Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that,
France were no place for Henry's warriors,
Nor should that nation boast it so with us,
But be extirped from our provinces.

ALANSON
Forever should they be expulsed from France,
And not have title of an earldom here.

PUCELLE
Your honors shall perceive how I will work
To bring this matter to the wished end.
[Drum sounds afar off.]
Hark! By the sound of drum you may perceive
Their powers are marching unto Paris-ward.
[Here sound an English march.]
There goes the Talbot with his colors spread,
And all the troops of English after him.
[French march.]
Now in the rearward comes the Duke and his.
Fortune in favor makes him lag behind.
Summon a parley; we will talk with him.
[Trumpets sound a parley.]

CHARLES
A parley with the Duke of Burgundy!

[Enter Burgundy.]


BURGUNDY
Who craves a parley with the Burgundy?

PUCELLE
The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.

BURGUNDY
What say'st thou, Charles?--for I am marching hence.

CHARLES, [aside to Pucelle]
Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.

PUCELLE
Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France,
Stay; let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.

BURGUNDY
Speak on, but be not over-tedious.

PUCELLE
Look on thy country, look on fertile France,
And see the cities and the towns defaced
By wasting ruin of the cruel foe.
As looks the mother on her lowly babe
When death doth close his tender-dying eyes,
See, see the pining malady of France:
Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds,
Which thou thyself hast given her woeful breast.
O, turn thy edged sword another way;
Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help.
One drop of blood drawn from thy country's bosom
Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore.
Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,
And wash away thy country's stained spots.

BURGUNDY, [aside]
Either she hath bewitched me with her words,
Or nature makes me suddenly relent.

PUCELLE
Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,
Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny.
Who join'st thou with but with a lordly nation
That will not trust thee but for profit's sake?
When Talbot hath set footing once in France
And fashioned thee that instrument of ill,
Who then but English Henry will be lord,
And thou be thrust out like a fugitive?
Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof:
Was not the Duke of Orleance thy foe?
And was he not in England prisoner?
But when they heard he was thine enemy,
They set him free, without his ransom paid,
In spite of Burgundy and all his friends.
See then, thou fight'st against thy countrymen,
And join'st with them will be thy slaughtermen.
Come, come, return; return, thou wandering lord.
Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.

BURGUNDY, [aside]
I am vanquished. These haughty words of hers
Have battered me like roaring cannon-shot,
And made me almost yield upon my knees.--
Forgive me, country, and sweet countrymen;
And, lords, accept this hearty kind embrace.
[He embraces Charles, Bastard, and Alanson.]
My forces and my power of men are yours.
So, farewell, Talbot. I'll no longer trust thee.

PUCELLE, [aside]
Done like a Frenchman: turn and turn again.

CHARLES
Welcome, brave duke. Thy friendship makes us fresh.

BASTARD
And doth beget new courage in our breasts.

ALANSON
Pucelle hath bravely played her part in this
And doth deserve a coronet of gold.

CHARLES
Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers,
And seek how we may prejudice the foe.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Flourish. Enter the King, Gloucester, Winchester,
Exeter; York, Warwick, and Vernon, with white roses;
Somerset, Suffolk, and Basset, with red roses.
To them, with his Soldiers, Talbot.]


TALBOT
My gracious prince and honorable peers,
Hearing of your arrival in this realm,
I have awhile given truce unto my wars
To do my duty to my sovereign;
In sign whereof, this arm, that hath reclaimed
To your obedience fifty fortresses,
Twelve cities, and seven walled towns of strength,
Besides five hundred prisoners of esteem,
Lets fall his sword before your Highness' feet,
And with submissive loyalty of heart
Ascribes the glory of his conquest got
First to my God, and next unto your Grace.
[He kneels.]

KING HENRY
Is this the Lord Talbot, Uncle Gloucester,
That hath so long been resident in France?

GLOUCESTER
Yes, if it please your Majesty, my liege.

KING HENRY
Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord.
When I was young--as yet I am not old--
I do remember how my father said
A stouter champion never handled sword.
Long since we were resolved of your truth,
Your faithful service, and your toil in war;
Yet never have you tasted our reward
Or been reguerdoned with so much as thanks,
Because till now we never saw your face.
Therefore stand up; and for these good deserts
We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury;
And in our coronation take your place.	[Talbot rises.]
[Sennet. Flourish. All except
Vernon and Basset exit.]

VERNON
Now, sir, to you that were so hot at sea,
Disgracing of these colors that I wear
In honor of my noble Lord of York,
Dar'st thou maintain the former words thou spak'st?

BASSET
Yes, sir, as well as you dare patronage
The envious barking of your saucy tongue
Against my lord the Duke of Somerset.

VERNON
Sirrah, thy lord I honor as he is.

BASSET
Why, what is he? As good a man as York.

VERNON
Hark you, not so; in witness, take you that.
[Strikes him.]

BASSET
Villain, thou knowest the law of arms is such
That whoso draws a sword 'tis present death,
Or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood.
But I'll unto his Majesty, and crave
I may have liberty to venge this wrong,
When thou shalt see I'll meet thee to thy cost.
[He exits.]

VERNON
Well, miscreant, I'll be there as soon as you,
And after meet you sooner than you would.
[He exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Flourish. Enter King, Gloucester, Winchester, Talbot,
Exeter; York and Warwick, with white roses; Suffolk
and Somerset, with red roses; Governor of Paris,
and Others.]


GLOUCESTER
Lord Bishop, set the crown upon his head.

WINCHESTER, [crowning King Henry]
God save King Henry, of that name the Sixth!

GLOUCESTER
Now, Governor of Paris, take your oath.
[Governor kneels.]
That you elect no other king but him;
Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,
And none your foes but such as shall pretend
Malicious practices against his state:
This shall you do, so help you righteous God.
[Governor rises.]

[Enter Fastolf.]


FASTOLF
My gracious sovereign, as I rode from Callice
To haste unto your coronation,
A letter was delivered to my hands,
Writ to your Grace from th' Duke of Burgundy.
[He hands the King a paper.]

TALBOT
Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!
I vowed, base knight, when I did meet thee next,
To tear the Garter from thy craven's leg,
[tearing it off]
Which I have done, because unworthily
Thou wast installed in that high degree.--
Pardon me, princely Henry and the rest.
This dastard, at the battle of Patay,
When but in all I was six thousand strong
And that the French were almost ten to one,
Before we met or that a stroke was given,
Like to a trusty squire did run away;
In which assault we lost twelve hundred men.
Myself and divers gentlemen besides
Were there surprised and taken prisoners.
Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss,
Or whether that such cowards ought to wear
This ornament of knighthood--yea or no?

GLOUCESTER
To say the truth, this fact was infamous
And ill beseeming any common man,
Much more a knight, a captain, and a leader.

TALBOT
When first this Order was ordained, my lords,
Knights of the Garter were of noble birth,
Valiant and virtuous, full of haughty courage,
Such as were grown to credit by the wars;
Not fearing death nor shrinking for distress,
But always resolute in most extremes.
He then that is not furnished in this sort
Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,
Profaning this most honorable Order,
And should, if I were worthy to be judge,
Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swain
That doth presume to boast of gentle blood.

KING HENRY, [to Fastolf]
Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear'st thy doom.
Be packing therefore, thou that wast a knight.
Henceforth we banish thee on pain of death.
[Fastolf exits.]
And now, my lord protector, view the letter
Sent from our uncle, Duke of Burgundy.
[He hands the paper to Gloucester.]

GLOUCESTER
What means his Grace that he hath changed his style?
No more but, plain and bluntly, "To the King"!
Hath he forgot he is his sovereign?
Or doth this churlish superscription
Pretend some alteration in good will?
What's here? [(Reads.)]
I have upon especial cause,
Moved with compassion of my country's wrack,
Together with the pitiful complaints
Of such as your oppression feeds upon,
Forsaken your pernicious faction
And joined with Charles, the rightful king of France.
O monstrous treachery! Can this be so?
That in alliance, amity, and oaths
There should be found such false dissembling guile?

KING HENRY
What? Doth my Uncle Burgundy revolt?

GLOUCESTER
He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.

KING HENRY
Is that the worst this letter doth contain?

GLOUCESTER
It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.

KING HENRY
Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with him
And give him chastisement for this abuse.--
How say you, my lord, are you not content?

TALBOT
Content, my liege? Yes. But that I am prevented,
I should have begged I might have been employed.

KING HENRY
Then gather strength and march unto him straight;
Let him perceive how ill we brook his treason
And what offense it is to flout his friends.

TALBOT
I go, my lord, in heart desiring still
You may behold confusion of your foes.	[He exits.]

[Enter Vernon, with a white rose, and Basset,
with a red rose.]


VERNON
Grant me the combat, gracious sovereign.

BASSET
And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.

YORK, [indicating Vernon]
This is my servant; hear him, noble prince.

SOMERSET, [indicating Basset]
And this is mine, sweet Henry; favor him.

KING HENRY
Be patient, lords, and give them leave to speak.--
Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim,
And wherefore crave you combat, or with whom?

VERNON
With him, my lord, for he hath done me wrong.

BASSET
And I with him, for he hath done me wrong.

KING HENRY
What is that wrong whereof you both complain?
First let me know, and then I'll answer you.

BASSET
Crossing the sea from England into France,
This fellow here with envious carping tongue
Upbraided me about the rose I wear,
Saying the sanguine color of the leaves
Did represent my master's blushing cheeks
When stubbornly he did repugn the truth
About a certain question in the law
Argued betwixt the Duke of York and him,
With other vile and ignominious terms.
In confutation of which rude reproach,
And in defense of my lord's worthiness,
I crave the benefit of law of arms.

VERNON
And that is my petition, noble lord;
For though he seem with forged quaint conceit
To set a gloss upon his bold intent,
Yet know, my lord, I was provoked by him,
And he first took exceptions at this badge,
Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower
Bewrayed the faintness of my master's heart.

YORK
Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?

SOMERSET
Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,
Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.

KING HENRY
Good Lord, what madness rules in brainsick men
When for so slight and frivolous a cause
Such factious emulations shall arise!
Good cousins both, of York and Somerset,
Quiet yourselves, I pray, and be at peace.

YORK
Let this dissension first be tried by fight,
And then your Highness shall command a peace.

SOMERSET
The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;
Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.

YORK, [throwing down a gage]
There is my pledge; accept it, Somerset.

VERNON, [to Somerset]
Nay, let it rest where it began at first.

BASSET, [to Somerset]
Confirm it so, mine honorable lord.

GLOUCESTER
Confirm it so? Confounded be your strife,
And perish you with your audacious prate!
Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamed
With this immodest clamorous outrage
To trouble and disturb the King and us?--
And you, my lords, methinks you do not well
To bear with their perverse objections,
Much less to take occasion from their mouths
To raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves.
Let me persuade you take a better course.

EXETER
It grieves his Highness. Good my lords, be friends.

KING HENRY
Come hither, you that would be combatants:
Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favor,
Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.--
And you, my lords, remember where we are:
In France, amongst a fickle wavering nation.
If they perceive dissension in our looks,
And that within ourselves we disagree,
How will their grudging stomachs be provoked
To willful disobedience and rebel!
Besides, what infamy will there arise
When foreign princes shall be certified
That for a toy, a thing of no regard,
King Henry's peers and chief nobility
Destroyed themselves and lost the realm of France!
O, think upon the conquest of my father,
My tender years, and let us not forgo
That for a trifle that was bought with blood.
Let me be umpire in this doubtful strife.
I see no reason if I wear this rose
That anyone should therefore be suspicious
I more incline to Somerset than York.
[He puts on a red rose.]
Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both.
As well they may upbraid me with my crown
Because, forsooth, the King of Scots is crowned.
But your discretions better can persuade
Than I am able to instruct or teach;
And therefore, as we hither came in peace,
So let us still continue peace and love.
Cousin of York, we institute your Grace
To be our regent in these parts of France;--
And good my Lord of Somerset, unite
Your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot;
And like true subjects, sons of your progenitors,
Go cheerfully together and digest
Your angry choler on your enemies.
Ourself, my lord protector, and the rest,
After some respite, will return to Callice;
From thence to England, where I hope ere long
To be presented, by your victories,
With Charles, Alanson, and that traitorous rout.
[Flourish. All but York, Warwick, Exeter, Vernon exit.]

WARWICK
My Lord of York, I promise you the King
Prettily, methought, did play the orator.

YORK
And so he did, but yet I like it not
In that he wears the badge of Somerset.

WARWICK
Tush, that was but his fancy; blame him not.
I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.

YORK
And if iwis he did--but let it rest.
Other affairs must now be managed.

[York, Warwick and Vernon exit.
Exeter remains.]

EXETER
Well didst thou, Richard, to suppress thy voice,
For had the passions of thy heart burst out,
I fear we should have seen deciphered there
More rancorous spite, more furious raging broils,
Than yet can be imagined or supposed.
But howsoe'er, no simple man that sees
This jarring discord of nobility,
This shouldering of each other in the court,
This factious bandying of their favorites,
But sees it doth presage some ill event.
'Tis much when scepters are in children's hands,
But more when envy breeds unkind division:
There comes the ruin; there begins confusion.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Talbot with Soldiers and Trump and Drum
before Bordeaux.]


TALBOT
Go to the gates of Bordeaux, trumpeter.
Summon their general unto the wall.

[Trumpet sounds. Enter General and Others aloft.]

English John Talbot, captains, calls you forth,
Servant-in-arms to Harry, King of England,
And thus he would: open your city gates,
Be humble to us, call my sovereign yours,
And do him homage as obedient subjects,
And I'll withdraw me and my bloody power.
But if you frown upon this proffered peace,
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Lean Famine, quartering Steel, and climbing Fire,
Who, in a moment, even with the earth
Shall lay your stately and air-braving towers,
If you forsake the offer of their love.

GENERAL
Thou ominous and fearful owl of death,
Our nation's terror and their bloody scourge,
The period of thy tyranny approacheth.
On us thou canst not enter but by death;
For I protest we are well fortified
And strong enough to issue out and fight.
If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed,
Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee.
On either hand thee, there are squadrons pitched
To wall thee from the liberty of flight;
And no way canst thou turn thee for redress
But Death doth front thee with apparent spoil,
And pale Destruction meets thee in the face.
Ten thousand French have ta'en the Sacrament
To rive their dangerous artillery
Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot.
Lo, there thou stand'st, a breathing valiant man
Of an invincible unconquered spirit.
This is the latest glory of thy praise
That I, thy enemy, due thee withal;
For ere the glass that now begins to run
Finish the process of his sandy hour,
These eyes, that see thee now well-colored,
Shall see thee withered, bloody, pale, and dead.
[Drum afar off.]
Hark, hark, the Dauphin's drum, a warning bell,
Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul,
And mine shall ring thy dire departure out.
[He exits, aloft, with Others.]

TALBOT
He fables not; I hear the enemy.
Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.
[Some Soldiers exit.]
O, negligent and heedless discipline,
How are we parked and bounded in a pale,
A little herd of England's timorous deer
Mazed with a yelping kennel of French curs.
If we be English deer, be then in blood,
Not rascal-like to fall down with a pinch,
But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,
Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel
And make the cowards stand aloof at bay.
Sell every man his life as dear as mine
And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends.
God and Saint George, Talbot and England's right,
Prosper our colors in this dangerous fight!
[He exits with Soldiers, Drum and Trumpet.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter a Messenger that meets York. Enter York
with Trumpet and many Soldiers.]


YORK
Are not the speedy scouts returned again
That dogged the mighty army of the Dauphin?

MESSENGER
They are returned, my lord, and give it out
That he is marched to Bordeaux with his power
To fight with Talbot. As he marched along,
By your espials were discovered
Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,
Which joined with him and made their march for
Bordeaux.	[He exits.]

YORK
A plague upon that villain Somerset
That thus delays my promised supply
Of horsemen that were levied for this siege!
Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,
And I am louted by a traitor villain
And cannot help the noble chevalier.
God comfort him in this necessity.
If he miscarry, farewell wars in France.

[Enter Sir William Lucy.]


LUCY
Thou princely leader of our English strength,
Never so needful on the earth of France,
Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot,
Who now is girdled with a waist of iron
And hemmed about with grim destruction.
To Bordeaux, warlike duke! To Bordeaux, York!
Else farewell Talbot, France, and England's honor.

YORK
O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart
Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot's place!
So should we save a valiant gentleman
By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.
Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep
That thus we die while remiss traitors sleep.

LUCY
O, send some succor to the distressed lord!

YORK
He dies, we lose; I break my warlike word;
We mourn, France smiles; we lose, they daily get,
All long of this vile traitor Somerset.

LUCY
Then God take mercy on brave Talbot's soul,
And on his son, young John, who two hours since
I met in travel toward his warlike father.
This seven years did not Talbot see his son,
And now they meet where both their lives are done.

YORK
Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have
To bid his young son welcome to his grave?
Away! Vexation almost stops my breath,
That sundered friends greet in the hour of death.
Lucy, farewell. No more my fortune can
But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.
Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours are won away,
Long all of Somerset and his delay.
[York and his Soldiers exit.]

LUCY
Thus while the vulture of sedition
Feeds in the bosom of such great commanders,
Sleeping neglection doth betray to loss
The conquest of our scarce-cold conqueror,
That ever-living man of memory,
Henry the Fifth. Whiles they each other cross,
Lives, honors, lands, and all hurry to loss.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Somerset with his army and a Captain
from Talbot's army.]


SOMERSET
It is too late; I cannot send them now.
This expedition was by York and Talbot
Too rashly plotted. All our general force
Might with a sally of the very town
Be buckled with. The overdaring Talbot
Hath sullied all his gloss of former honor
By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure.
York set him on to fight and die in shame
That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.

[Enter Sir William Lucy.]


CAPTAIN
Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me
Set from our o'er-matched forces forth for aid.

SOMERSET
How now, Sir William, whither were you sent?

LUCY
Whither, my lord? From bought and sold Lord Talbot,
Who, ringed about with bold adversity,
Cries out for noble York and Somerset
To beat assailing Death from his weak regions;
And whiles the honorable captain there
Drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs
And, in advantage ling'ring, looks for rescue,
You, his false hopes, the trust of England's honor,
Keep off aloof with worthless emulation.
Let not your private discord keep away
The levied succors that should lend him aid,
While he, renowned noble gentleman,
Yield up his life unto a world of odds.
Orleance the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,
Alanson, Reignier compass him about,
And Talbot perisheth by your default.

SOMERSET
York set him on; York should have sent him aid.

LUCY
And York as fast upon your Grace exclaims,
Swearing that you withhold his levied host
Collected for this expedition.

SOMERSET
York lies. He might have sent and had the horse.
I owe him little duty and less love,
And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.

LUCY
The fraud of England, not the force of France,
Hath now entrapped the noble-minded Talbot.
Never to England shall he bear his life,
But dies betrayed to fortune by your strife.

SOMERSET
Come, go. I will dispatch the horsemen straight.
Within six hours they will be at his aid.

LUCY
Too late comes rescue; he is ta'en or slain,
For fly he could not if he would have fled;
And fly would Talbot never, though he might.

SOMERSET
If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu.

LUCY
His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Talbot and John Talbot, his son.]


TALBOT
O young John Talbot, I did send for thee
To tutor thee in stratagems of war,
That Talbot's name might be in thee revived
When sapless age and weak unable limbs
Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.
But--O, malignant and ill-boding stars!--
Now thou art come unto a feast of Death,
A terrible and unavoided danger.
Therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse,
And I'll direct thee how thou shalt escape
By sudden flight. Come, dally not, be gone.

JOHN TALBOT
Is my name Talbot? And am I your son?
And shall I fly? O, if you love my mother,
Dishonor not her honorable name
To make a bastard and a slave of me!
The world will say "He is not Talbot's blood,
That basely fled when noble Talbot stood."

TALBOT
Fly, to revenge my death if I be slain.

JOHN TALBOT
He that flies so will ne'er return again.

TALBOT
If we both stay, we both are sure to die.

JOHN TALBOT
Then let me stay and, father, do you fly.
Your loss is great; so your regard should be.
My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.
Upon my death, the French can little boast;
In yours they will; in you all hopes are lost.
Flight cannot stain the honor you have won,
But mine it will, that no exploit have done.
You fled for vantage, everyone will swear;
But if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.
There is no hope that ever I will stay
If the first hour I shrink and run away.	[He kneels.]
Here on my knee I beg mortality,
Rather than life preserved with infamy.

TALBOT
Shall all thy mother's hopes lie in one tomb?

JOHN TALBOT
Ay, rather than I'll shame my mother's womb.

TALBOT
Upon my blessing I command thee go.

JOHN TALBOT
To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.

TALBOT
Part of thy father may be saved in thee.

JOHN TALBOT
No part of him but will be shame in me.

TALBOT
Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.

JOHN TALBOT
Yes, your renowned name; shall flight abuse it?

TALBOT
Thy father's charge shall clear thee from that stain.

JOHN TALBOT
You cannot witness for me, being slain.
If death be so apparent, then both fly.

TALBOT
And leave my followers here to fight and die?
My age was never tainted with such shame.

JOHN TALBOT
And shall my youth be guilty of such blame?
[He rises.]
No more can I be severed from your side
Than can yourself yourself in twain divide.
Stay, go, do what you will; the like do I,
For live I will not, if my father die.

TALBOT
Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,
Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.
Come, side by side, together live and die,
And soul with soul from France to heaven fly.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Alarum. Excursions, wherein Talbot's son John
is hemmed about, and Talbot rescues him.]


TALBOT
Saint George, and victory! Fight, soldiers, fight!
The Regent hath with Talbot broke his word
And left us to the rage of France his sword.
Where is John Talbot?--Pause, and take thy breath;
I gave thee life and rescued thee from death.

JOHN TALBOT
O, twice my father, twice am I thy son!
The life thou gav'st me first was lost and done
Till with thy warlike sword, despite of fate,
To my determined time thou gav'st new date.

TALBOT
When from the Dauphin's crest thy sword struck fire,
It warmed thy father's heart with proud desire
Of bold-faced victory. Then leaden age,
Quickened with youthful spleen and warlike rage,
Beat down Alanson, Orleance, Burgundy,
And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.
The ireful Bastard Orleance, that drew blood
From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood
Of thy first fight, I soon encountered,
And, interchanging blows, I quickly shed
Some of his bastard blood, and in disgrace
Bespoke him thus: "Contaminated, base,
And misbegotten blood I spill of thine,
Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine
Which thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy."
Here, purposing the Bastard to destroy,
Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy father's care:
Art thou not weary, John? How dost thou fare?
Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,
Now thou art sealed the son of chivalry?
Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead;
The help of one stands me in little stead.
O, too much folly is it, well I wot,
To hazard all our lives in one small boat.
If I today die not with Frenchmen's rage,
Tomorrow I shall die with mickle age.
By me they nothing gain, and, if I stay,
'Tis but the short'ning of my life one day.
In thee thy mother dies, our household's name,
My death's revenge, thy youth, and England's fame.
All these and more we hazard by thy stay;
All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.

JOHN TALBOT
The sword of Orleance hath not made me smart;
These words of yours draw lifeblood from my heart.
On that advantage, bought with such a shame,
To save a paltry life and slay bright fame,
Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,
The coward horse that bears me fall and die!
And like me to the peasant boys of France,
To be shame's scorn and subject of mischance!
Surely, by all the glory you have won,
An if I fly, I am not Talbot's son.
Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot;
If son to Talbot, die at Talbot's foot.

TALBOT
Then follow thou thy desp'rate sire of Crete,
Thou Icarus; thy life to me is sweet.
If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father's side,
And commendable proved, let's die in pride.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Alarum. Excursions. Enter old Talbot
led by a Servant.]


TALBOT
Where is my other life? Mine own is gone.
O, where's young Talbot? Where is valiant John?
Triumphant Death, smeared with captivity,
Young Talbot's valor makes me smile at thee.
When he perceived me shrink and on my knee,
His bloody sword he brandished over me,
And like a hungry lion did commence
Rough deeds of rage and stern impatience;
But when my angry guardant stood alone,
Tend'ring my ruin and assailed of none,
Dizzy-eyed fury and great rage of heart
Suddenly made him from my side to start
Into the clust'ring battle of the French;
And in that sea of blood, my boy did drench
His over-mounting spirit; and there died
My Icarus, my blossom, in his pride.

[Enter Soldiers with John Talbot, borne.]


SERVINGMAN
O, my dear lord, lo where your son is borne!

TALBOT
Thou antic Death, which laugh'st us here to scorn,
Anon from thy insulting tyranny,
Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,
Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,
In thy despite shall scape mortality.--
O, thou whose wounds become hard-favored Death,
Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath!
Brave Death by speaking, whither he will or no.
Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe.--
Poor boy, he smiles, methinks, as who should say
"Had Death been French, then Death had died
today."--
Come, come, and lay him in his father's arms;
My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have,
Now my old arms are young John Talbot's grave.
[Dies.]
[Alarums. Soldiers exit.]

[Enter Charles, Alanson, Burgundy, Bastard,
and Pucelle, with Forces.]


CHARLES
Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,
We should have found a bloody day of this.

BASTARD
How the young whelp of Talbot's, raging wood,
Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmen's blood!

PUCELLE
Once I encountered him, and thus I said:
"Thou maiden youth, be vanquished by a maid."
But with a proud majestical high scorn
He answered thus: "Young Talbot was not born
To be the pillage of a giglot wench."
So, rushing in the bowels of the French,
He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.

BURGUNDY
Doubtless he would have made a noble knight.
See where he lies inhearsed in the arms
Of the most bloody nurser of his harms.

BASTARD
Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder,
Whose life was England's glory, Gallia's wonder.

CHARLES
O, no, forbear! For that which we have fled
During the life, let us not wrong it dead.

[Enter Lucy with Attendants and a French Herald.]


LUCY
Herald, conduct me to the Dauphin's tent,
To know who hath obtained the glory of the day.

CHARLES
On what submissive message art thou sent?

LUCY
Submission, dauphin? 'Tis a mere French word.
We English warriors wot not what it means.
I come to know what prisoners thou hast ta'en,
And to survey the bodies of the dead.

CHARLES
For prisoners askst thou? Hell our prison is.
But tell me whom thou seek'st.

LUCY
But where's the great Alcides of the field,
Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,
Created for his rare success in arms
Great Earl of Washford, Waterford, and Valence,
Lord Talbot of Goodrich and Urchinfield,
Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdon of Alton,
Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of
Sheffield,
The thrice victorious Lord of Falconbridge,
Knight of the noble Order of Saint George,
Worthy Saint Michael, and the Golden Fleece,
Great Marshal to Henry the Sixth
Of all his wars within the realm of France?

PUCELLE
Here's a silly stately style indeed.
The Turk, that two-and-fifty kingdoms hath,
Writes not so tedious a style as this.
Him that thou magnifi'st with all these titles
Stinking and flyblown lies here at our feet.

LUCY
Is Talbot slain, the Frenchmen's only scourge,
Your kingdom's terror and black Nemesis?
O, were mine eyeballs into bullets turned
That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!
O, that I could but call these dead to life,
It were enough to fright the realm of France.
Were but his picture left amongst you here,
It would amaze the proudest of you all.
Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence
And give them burial as beseems their worth.

PUCELLE
I think this upstart is old Talbot's ghost,
He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.
For God's sake, let him have him. To keep them here,
They would but stink and putrefy the air.

CHARLES
Go, take their bodies hence.

LUCY  I'll bear them hence.
But from their ashes shall be reared
A phoenix that shall make all France afeard.

CHARLES
So we be rid of them, do with him what thou wilt.
[Lucy, Servant, and Attendants exit,
bearing the bodies.]
And now to Paris in this conquering vein.
All will be ours, now bloody Talbot's slain.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Sennet. Enter King, Gloucester, and Exeter,
with Attendants.]


KING HENRY, [to Gloucester]
Have you perused the letters from the Pope,
The Emperor, and the Earl of Armagnac?

GLOUCESTER
I have, my lord, and their intent is this:
They humbly sue unto your Excellence
To have a godly peace concluded of
Between the realms of England and of France.

KING HENRY
How doth your Grace affect their motion?

GLOUCESTER
Well, my good lord, and as the only means
To stop effusion of our Christian blood
And stablish quietness on every side.

KING HENRY
Ay, marry, uncle, for I always thought
It was both impious and unnatural
That such immanity and bloody strife
Should reign among professors of one faith.

GLOUCESTER
Besides, my lord, the sooner to effect
And surer bind this knot of amity,
The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles,
A man of great authority in France,
Proffers his only daughter to your Grace
In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.

KING HENRY
Marriage, uncle? Alas, my years are young;
And fitter is my study and my books
Than wanton dalliance with a paramour.
Yet call th' Ambassadors and, as you please,
So let them have their answers every one.
[An Attendant exits.]
I shall be well content with any choice
Tends to God's glory and my country's weal.

[Enter Winchester, dressed in cardinal's robes,
and the Ambassador of Armagnac, a Papal Legate,
and another Ambassador.]


EXETER, [aside]
What, is my Lord of Winchester installed
And called unto a cardinal's degree?
Then I perceive that will be verified
Henry the Fifth did sometime prophesy:
"If once he come to be a cardinal,
He'll make his cap coequal with the crown."

KING HENRY
My Lords Ambassadors, your several suits
Have been considered and debated on;
Your purpose is both good and reasonable,
And therefore are we certainly resolved
To draw conditions of a friendly peace,
Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean
Shall be transported presently to France.

GLOUCESTER, [to the Ambassador of Armagnac]
And for the proffer of my lord your master,
I have informed his Highness so at large
As, liking of the lady's virtuous gifts,
Her beauty, and the value of her dower,
He doth intend she shall be England's queen.

KING HENRY, [handing a jewel to the Ambassador]
In argument and proof of which contract,
Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection.--
And so, my Lord Protector, see them guarded
And safely brought to Dover, where, inshipped,
Commit them to the fortune of the sea.
[All except Winchester and Legate exit.]

WINCHESTER
Stay, my Lord Legate; you shall first receive
The sum of money which I promised
Should be delivered to his Holiness
For clothing me in these grave ornaments.

LEGATE
I will attend upon your Lordship's leisure.	[He exits.]

WINCHESTER
Now Winchester will not submit, I trow,
Or be inferior to the proudest peer.
Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceive
That neither in birth or for authority
The Bishop will be overborne by thee.
I'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee,
Or sack this country with a mutiny.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Charles, Burgundy, Alanson, Bastard,
Reignier, and Joan la Pucelle, with Soldiers.]


CHARLES
These news, my lords, may cheer our drooping spirits:
'Tis said the stout Parisians do revolt
And turn again unto the warlike French.

ALANSON
Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,
And keep not back your powers in dalliance.

PUCELLE
Peace be amongst them if they turn to us;
Else ruin combat with their palaces!

[Enter Scout.]


SCOUT
Success unto our valiant general,
And happiness to his accomplices.

CHARLES
What tidings send our scouts? I prithee speak.

SCOUT
The English army that divided was
Into two parties is now conjoined in one,
And means to give you battle presently.

CHARLES
Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is,
But we will presently provide for them.

BURGUNDY
I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there.
Now he is gone, my lord, you need not fear.

PUCELLE
Of all base passions, fear is most accursed.
Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine;
Let Henry fret and all the world repine.

CHARLES
Then on, my lords, and France be fortunate!
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Alarum. Excursions. Enter Joan la Pucelle.]


PUCELLE
The Regent conquers and the Frenchmen fly.
Now help, you charming spells and periapts,
And you choice spirits that admonish me,
And give me signs of future accidents.	[Thunder.]
You speedy helpers, that are substitutes
Under the lordly monarch of the north,
Appear, and aid me in this enterprise.

[Enter Fiends.]

This speed and quick appearance argues proof
Of your accustomed diligence to me.
Now, you familiar spirits that are culled
Out of the powerful regions under earth,
Help me this once, that France may get the field.
[They walk, and speak not.]
O, hold me not with silence overlong!
Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
I'll lop a member off and give it you
In earnest of a further benefit,
So you do condescend to help me now.
[They hang their heads.]
No hope to have redress? My body shall
Pay recompense if you will grant my suit.
[They shake their heads.]
Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice
Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
Then take my soul--my body, soul, and all--
Before that England give the French the foil.
[They depart.]
See, they forsake me. Now the time is come
That France must vail her lofty-plumed crest
And let her head fall into England's lap.
My ancient incantations are too weak,
And hell too strong for me to buckle with.
Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.
[She exits.]

[Excursions. Burgundy and York fight hand to hand.
Burgundy and the French fly as York and English
soldiers capture Joan la Pucelle.]


YORK
Damsel of France, I think I have you fast.
Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms,
And try if they can gain your liberty.
A goodly prize, fit for the devil's grace!
See how the ugly witch doth bend her brows
As if with Circe she would change my shape.

PUCELLE
Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be.

YORK
O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man;
No shape but his can please your dainty eye.

PUCELLE
A plaguing mischief light on Charles and thee,
And may you both be suddenly surprised
By bloody hands in sleeping on your beds!

YORK
Fell banning hag! Enchantress, hold thy tongue.

PUCELLE
I prithee give me leave to curse awhile.

YORK
Curse, miscreant, when thou com'st to the stake.
[They exit.]

[Alarum. Enter Suffolk with Margaret in his hand.]


SUFFOLK
Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.
[Gazes on her.]
O fairest beauty, do not fear nor fly,
For I will touch thee but with reverent hands.
I kiss these fingers for eternal peace
And lay them gently on thy tender side.
Who art thou? Say, that I may honor thee.

MARGARET
Margaret my name, and daughter to a king,
The King of Naples, whosoe'er thou art.

SUFFOLK
An earl I am, and Suffolk am I called.
Be not offended, nature's miracle;
Thou art allotted to be ta'en by me.
So doth the swan her downy cygnets save,
Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings.
Yet if this servile usage once offend,
Go and be free again as Suffolk's friend.
[She is going.]
O, stay! [(Aside.)] I have no power to let her pass.
My hand would free her, but my heart says no.
As plays the sun upon the glassy streams,
Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.
Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak.
I'll call for pen and ink and write my mind.
Fie, de la Pole, disable not thyself!
Hast not a tongue? Is she not here?
Wilt thou be daunted at a woman's sight?
Ay. Beauty's princely majesty is such
Confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough.

MARGARET
Say, Earl of Suffolk, if thy name be so,
What ransom must I pay before I pass?
For I perceive I am thy prisoner.

SUFFOLK, [aside]
How canst thou tell she will deny thy suit
Before thou make a trial of her love?

MARGARET
Why speak'st thou not? What ransom must I pay?

SUFFOLK, [aside]
She's beautiful, and therefore to be wooed;
She is a woman, therefore to be won.

MARGARET
Wilt thou accept of ransom, yea or no?

SUFFOLK, [aside]
Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife;
Then how can Margaret be thy paramour?

MARGARET, [aside]
I were best to leave him, for he will not hear.

SUFFOLK, [aside]
There all is marred; there lies a cooling card.

MARGARET, [aside]
He talks at random; sure the man is mad.

SUFFOLK, [aside]
And yet a dispensation may be had.

MARGARET
And yet I would that you would answer me.

SUFFOLK, [aside]
I'll win this Lady Margaret. For whom?
Why, for my king. Tush, that's a wooden thing!

MARGARET, [aside]
He talks of wood. It is some carpenter.

SUFFOLK, [aside]
Yet so my fancy may be satisfied,
And peace established between these realms.
But there remains a scruple in that, too;
For though her father be the King of Naples,
Duke of Anjou and Maine, yet is he poor,
And our nobility will scorn the match.

MARGARET
Hear you, captain? Are you not at leisure?

SUFFOLK, [aside]
It shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much.
Henry is youthful, and will quickly yield.--
Madam, I have a secret to reveal.

MARGARET, [aside]
What though I be enthralled, he seems a knight,
And will not any way dishonor me.

SUFFOLK
Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.

MARGARET, [aside]
Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French,
And then I need not crave his courtesy.

SUFFOLK
Sweet madam, give me hearing in a cause.

MARGARET, [aside]
Tush, women have been captivate ere now.

SUFFOLK
Lady, wherefore talk you so?

MARGARET
I cry you mercy, 'tis but quid for quo.

SUFFOLK
Say, gentle princess, would you not suppose
Your bondage happy, to be made a queen?

MARGARET
To be a queen in bondage is more vile
Than is a slave in base servility,
For princes should be free.

SUFFOLK  And so shall you,
If happy England's royal king be free.

MARGARET
Why, what concerns his freedom unto me?

SUFFOLK
I'll undertake to make thee Henry's queen,
To put a golden scepter in thy hand
And set a precious crown upon thy head,
If thou wilt condescend to be my--

MARGARET  What?

SUFFOLK  His love.

MARGARET
I am unworthy to be Henry's wife.

SUFFOLK
No, gentle madam, I unworthy am
To woo so fair a dame to be his wife,
And have no portion in the choice myself.
How say you, madam? Are you so content?

MARGARET
An if my father please, I am content.

SUFFOLK
Then call our captains and our colors forth!
[A Soldier exits.]
And, madam, at your father's castle walls
We'll crave a parley to confer with him.

[Enter Captains and Trumpets. Sound a parley.]
[Enter Reignier on the walls.]

See, Reignier, see thy daughter prisoner!

REIGNIER
To whom?

SUFFOLK  To me.

REIGNIER  Suffolk, what remedy?
I am a soldier and unapt to weep
Or to exclaim on Fortune's fickleness.

SUFFOLK
Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord:
Consent, and, for thy Honor give consent,
Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king,
Whom I with pain have wooed and won thereto;
And this her easy-held imprisonment
Hath gained thy daughter princely liberty.

REIGNIER
Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?

SUFFOLK  Fair Margaret knows
That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.

REIGNIER
Upon thy princely warrant, I descend
To give thee answer of thy just demand.
[He exits from the walls.]

SUFFOLK
And here I will expect thy coming.

[Trumpets sound. Enter Reignier, below.]


REIGNIER
Welcome, brave earl, into our territories.
Command in Anjou what your Honor pleases.

SUFFOLK
Thanks, Reignier, happy for so sweet a child,
Fit to be made companion with a king.
What answer makes your Grace unto my suit?

REIGNIER
Since thou dost deign to woo her little worth
To be the princely bride of such a lord,
Upon condition I may quietly
Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,
Free from oppression or the stroke of war,
My daughter shall be Henry's, if he please.

SUFFOLK
That is her ransom; I deliver her,
And those two counties I will undertake
Your Grace shall well and quietly enjoy.

REIGNIER
And I, again in Henry's royal name
As deputy unto that gracious king,
Give thee her hand for sign of plighted faith.

SUFFOLK
Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks
Because this is in traffic of a king.
[Aside.] And yet methinks I could be well content
To be mine own attorney in this case.--
I'll over then to England with this news,
And make this marriage to be solemnized.
So farewell, Reignier; set this diamond safe
In golden palaces, as it becomes.

REIGNIER, [embracing Suffolk]
I do embrace thee, as I would embrace
The Christian prince King Henry, were he here.

MARGARET, [to Suffolk]
Farewell, my lord; good wishes, praise, and prayers
Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.
[She is going, as Reignier exits.]

SUFFOLK
Farewell, sweet madam. But, hark you, Margaret,
No princely commendations to my king?

MARGARET
Such commendations as becomes a maid,
A virgin, and his servant, say to him.

SUFFOLK
Words sweetly placed and modestly directed.
But, madam, I must trouble you again:
No loving token to his Majesty?

MARGARET
Yes, my good lord: a pure unspotted heart,
Never yet taint with love, I send the King.

SUFFOLK  And this withal.	[Kiss her.]

MARGARET
That for thyself. I will not so presume
To send such peevish tokens to a king.	[She exits.]

SUFFOLK
O, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay.
Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth.
There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk.
Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise;
Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount
And natural graces that extinguish art;
Repeat their semblance often on the seas,
That, when thou com'st to kneel at Henry's feet,
Thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter York, Warwick, Shepherd,
and Pucelle, guarded.]


YORK
Bring forth that sorceress condemned to burn.

SHEPHERD
Ah, Joan, this kills thy father's heart outright.
Have I sought every country far and near,
And, now it is my chance to find thee out,
Must I behold thy timeless cruel death?
Ah, Joan, sweet daughter Joan, I'll die with thee.

PUCELLE
Decrepit miser, base ignoble wretch!
I am descended of a gentler blood.
Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.

SHEPHERD
Out, out!--My lords, an please you, 'tis not so!
I did beget her, all the parish knows;
Her mother liveth yet, can testify
She was the first fruit of my bach'lorship.

WARWICK
Graceless, wilt thou deny thy parentage?

YORK
This argues what her kind of life hath been,
Wicked and vile; and so her death concludes.

SHEPHERD
Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle!
God knows thou art a collop of my flesh,
And for thy sake have I shed many a tear.
Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.

PUCELLE
Peasant, avaunt!--You have suborned this man
Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.

SHEPHERD
'Tis true, I gave a noble to the priest
The morn that I was wedded to her mother.--
Kneel down and take my blessing, good my girl.
Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
Of thy nativity! I would the milk
Thy mother gave thee when thou suck'dst her
breast
Had been a little ratsbane for thy sake!
Or else, when thou didst keep my lambs afield,
I wish some ravenous wolf had eaten thee!
Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab?
O burn her, burn her! Hanging is too good.	[He exits.]

YORK
Take her away, for she hath lived too long
To fill the world with vicious qualities.

PUCELLE
First, let me tell you whom you have condemned:
Not one begotten of a shepherd swain,
But issued from the progeny of kings,
Virtuous and holy, chosen from above
By inspiration of celestial grace
To work exceeding miracles on earth.
I never had to do with wicked spirits.
But you, that are polluted with your lusts,
Stained with the guiltless blood of innocents,
Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,
Because you want the grace that others have,
You judge it straight a thing impossible
To compass wonders but by help of devils.
No, misconceived! Joan of Arc hath been
A virgin from her tender infancy,
Chaste and immaculate in very thought,
Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused,
Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.

YORK
Ay, ay.--Away with her to execution.

WARWICK
And hark you, sirs: because she is a maid,
Spare for no faggots; let there be enow.
Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake
That so her torture may be shortened.

PUCELLE
Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?
Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity,
That warranteth by law to be thy privilege:
I am with child, you bloody homicides.
Murder not then the fruit within my womb,
Although you hale me to a violent death.

YORK
Now heaven forfend, the holy maid with child?

WARWICK, [to Pucelle]
The greatest miracle that e'er you wrought!
Is all your strict preciseness come to this?

YORK
She and the Dauphin have been juggling.
I did imagine what would be her refuge.

WARWICK
Well, go to, we'll have no bastards live,
Especially since Charles must father it.

PUCELLE
You are deceived; my child is none of his.
It was Alanson that enjoyed my love.

YORK
Alanson, that notorious Machiavel?
It dies an if it had a thousand lives!

PUCELLE
O, give me leave! I have deluded you.
'Twas neither Charles nor yet the Duke I named,
But Reignier, King of Naples, that prevailed.

WARWICK
A married man? That's most intolerable.

YORK
Why, here's a girl! I think she knows not well--
There were so many--whom she may accuse.

WARWICK
It's sign she hath been liberal and free.

YORK
And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure!--
Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee.
Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.

PUCELLE
Then lead me hence, with whom I leave my curse:
May never glorious sun reflex his beams
Upon the country where you make abode,
But darkness and the gloomy shade of death
Environ you, till mischief and despair
Drive you to break your necks or hang yourselves.
[She exits, led by Guards.]

YORK
Break thou in pieces, and consume to ashes,
Thou foul accursed minister of hell!

[Enter Winchester, as Cardinal.]


WINCHESTER
Lord Regent, I do greet your Excellence
With letters of commission from the King.
For know, my lords, the states of Christendom,
Moved with remorse of these outrageous broils,
Have earnestly implored a general peace
Betwixt our nation and the aspiring French;
And here at hand the Dauphin and his train
Approacheth to confer about some matter.

YORK
Is all our travail turned to this effect?
After the slaughter of so many peers,
So many captains, gentlemen, and soldiers
That in this quarrel have been overthrown
And sold their bodies for their country's benefit,
Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?
Have we not lost most part of all the towns--
By treason, falsehood, and by treachery--
Our great progenitors had conquered?
O, Warwick, Warwick, I foresee with grief
The utter loss of all the realm of France!

WARWICK
Be patient, York; if we conclude a peace
It shall be with such strict and severe covenants
As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.

[Enter Charles, Alanson, Bastard,
Reignier, with Attendants.]


CHARLES
Since, lords of England, it is thus agreed
That peaceful truce shall be proclaimed in France,
We come to be informed by yourselves
What the conditions of that league must be.

YORK
Speak, Winchester, for boiling choler chokes
The hollow passage of my poisoned voice
By sight of these our baleful enemies.

WINCHESTER
Charles and the rest, it is enacted thus:
That, in regard King Henry gives consent,
Of mere compassion and of lenity,
To ease your country of distressful war
And suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace,
You shall become true liegemen to his crown.
And, Charles, upon condition thou wilt swear
To pay him tribute and submit thyself,
Thou shalt be placed as viceroy under him,
And still enjoy thy regal dignity.

ALANSON
Must he be then as shadow of himself--
Adorn his temples with a coronet,
And yet, in substance and authority,
Retain but privilege of a private man?
This proffer is absurd and reasonless.

CHARLES
'Tis known already that I am possessed
With more than half the Gallian territories,
And therein reverenced for their lawful king.
Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquished,
Detract so much from that prerogative
As to be called but viceroy of the whole?
No, lord ambassador, I'll rather keep
That which I have than, coveting for more,
Be cast from possibility of all.

YORK
Insulting Charles, hast thou by secret means
Used intercession to obtain a league
And, now the matter grows to compromise,
Stand'st thou aloof upon comparison?
Either accept the title thou usurp'st,
Of benefit proceeding from our king
And not of any challenge of desert,
Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.

REIGNIER, [aside to Charles]
My lord, you do not well in obstinacy
To cavil in the course of this contract.
If once it be neglected, ten to one
We shall not find like opportunity.

ALANSON, [aside to Charles]
To say the truth, it is your policy
To save your subjects from such massacre
And ruthless slaughters as are daily seen
By our proceeding in hostility;
And therefore take this compact of a truce
Although you break it when your pleasure serves.

WARWICK
How say'st thou, Charles? Shall our condition stand?

CHARLES
It shall--only reserved you claim no interest
In any of our towns of garrison.

YORK
Then swear allegiance to his Majesty,
As thou art knight, never to disobey
Nor be rebellious to the crown of England,
Thou nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.
[Charles, Alanson, Bastard, and Reignier
swear allegiance to Henry.]
So, now dismiss your army when you please;
Hang up your ensigns, let your drums be still,
For here we entertain a solemn peace.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Suffolk in conference with the King,
Gloucester, and Exeter, with Attendants.]


KING HENRY
Your wondrous rare description, noble earl,
Of beauteous Margaret hath astonished me.
Her virtues graced with external gifts
Do breed love's settled passions in my heart,
And like as rigor of tempestuous gusts
Provokes the mightiest hulk against the tide,
So am I driven by breath of her renown
Either to suffer shipwrack, or arrive
Where I may have fruition of her love.

SUFFOLK
Tush, my good lord, this superficial tale
Is but a preface of her worthy praise.
The chief perfections of that lovely dame,
Had I sufficient skill to utter them,
Would make a volume of enticing lines
Able to ravish any dull conceit;
And, which is more, she is not so divine,
So full replete with choice of all delights,
But with as humble lowliness of mind
She is content to be at your command--
Command, I mean, of virtuous chaste intents--
To love and honor Henry as her lord.

KING HENRY
And otherwise will Henry ne'er presume.--
Therefore, my Lord Protector, give consent
That Margaret may be England's royal queen.

GLOUCESTER
So should I give consent to flatter sin.
You know, my lord, your Highness is betrothed
Unto another lady of esteem.
How shall we then dispense with that contract
And not deface your honor with reproach?

SUFFOLK
As doth a ruler with unlawful oaths;
Or one that, at a triumph having vowed
To try his strength, forsaketh yet the lists
By reason of his adversary's odds.
A poor earl's daughter is unequal odds,
And therefore may be broke without offense.

GLOUCESTER
Why, what, I pray, is Margaret more than that?
Her father is no better than an earl,
Although in glorious titles he excel.

SUFFOLK
Yes, my lord, her father is a king,
The King of Naples and Jerusalem,
And of such great authority in France
As his alliance will confirm our peace,
And keep the Frenchmen in allegiance.

GLOUCESTER
And so the Earl of Armagnac may do,
Because he is near kinsman unto Charles.

EXETER
Besides, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower,
Where Reignier sooner will receive than give.

SUFFOLK
A dower, my lords? Disgrace not so your king
That he should be so abject, base, and poor,
To choose for wealth and not for perfect love.
Henry is able to enrich his queen,
And not to seek a queen to make him rich;
So worthless peasants bargain for their wives,
As market men for oxen, sheep, or horse.
Marriage is a matter of more worth
Than to be dealt in by attorneyship.
Not whom we will, but whom his Grace affects,
Must be companion of his nuptial bed.
And therefore, lords, since he affects her most,
Most of all these reasons bindeth us
In our opinions she should be preferred.
For what is wedlock forced but a hell,
An age of discord and continual strife?
Whereas the contrary bringeth bliss
And is a pattern of celestial peace.
Whom should we match with Henry, being a king,
But Margaret, that is daughter to a king?
Her peerless feature, joined with her birth,
Approves her fit for none but for a king.
Her valiant courage and undaunted spirit,
More than in women commonly is seen,
Will answer our hope in issue of a king.
For Henry, son unto a conqueror,
Is likely to beget more conquerors,
If with a lady of so high resolve
As is fair Margaret he be linked in love.
Then yield, my lords, and here conclude with me
That Margaret shall be queen, and none but she.

KING HENRY
Whether it be through force of your report,
My noble Lord of Suffolk, or for that
My tender youth was never yet attaint
With any passion of inflaming love,
I cannot tell; but this I am assured:
I feel such sharp dissension in my breast,
Such fierce alarums both of hope and fear,
As I am sick with working of my thoughts.
Take therefore shipping; post, my lord, to France;
Agree to any covenants, and procure
That Lady Margaret do vouchsafe to come
To cross the seas to England and be crowned
King Henry's faithful and anointed queen.
For your expenses and sufficient charge,
Among the people gather up a tenth.
Be gone, I say, for till you do return,
I rest perplexed with a thousand cares.--
And you, good uncle, banish all offense.
If you do censure me by what you were,
Not what you are, I know it will excuse
This sudden execution of my will.
And so conduct me where, from company,
I may revolve and ruminate my grief.
[He exits with Attendants.]

GLOUCESTER
Ay, grief, I fear me, both at first and last.
[Gloucester exits with Exeter.]

SUFFOLK
Thus Suffolk hath prevailed, and thus he goes
As did the youthful Paris once to Greece,
With hope to find the like event in love,
But prosper better than the Trojan did.
Margaret shall now be queen, and rule the King,
But I will rule both her, the King, and realm.
[He exits.]

Henry IV, Part 2
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/henry-iv-part-2/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
RUMOR, Presenter of the Induction
KING HENRY IV, formerly Henry Bolingbroke
PRINCE HAL, Prince of Wales and heir to the throne, later KING HENRY V
Younger sons of King Henry IV:
  JOHN OF LANCASTER
  THOMAS OF CLARENCE
  HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER
EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND, Henry Percy
NORTHUMBERLAND'S WIFE
LADY PERCY, widow of Hotspur
In rebellion against King Henry IV:
  Richard Scroop, ARCHBISHOP of York
  LORD MOWBRAY
  LORD HASTINGS
  LORD BARDOLPH
  TRAVERS
  MORTON
  SIR JOHN COLEVILE
Supporters of King Henry IV:
  EARL OF WESTMORELAND
  EARL OF WARWICK
  EARL OF SURREY
  SIR JOHN BLUNT
  GOWER
  HARCOURT
LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
SIR JOHN FALSTAFF
POINS
BARDOLPH
PETO
PISTOL
FALSTAFF'S PAGE
HOSTESS of the tavern (also called Mistress Quickly)
DOLL TEARSHEET
JUSTICE ROBERT SHALLOW
JUSTICE SILENCE
DAVY, servant to Shallow
Men of Gloucestershire:
  MOULDY
  SHADOW
  WART
  FEEBLE
  BULLCALF
London officers:
  FANG
  SNARE
EPILOGUE
Drawers, Musicians, Beadles, Grooms, Messenger, Soldiers, Lords, Attendants, Page, Porter, Servants, Officers


INDUCTION
=========
[Enter Rumor, painted full of tongues.]


RUMOR
Open your ears, for which of you will stop
The vent of hearing when loud Rumor speaks?
I, from the orient to the drooping west,
Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold
The acts commenced on this ball of earth.
Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,
The which in every language I pronounce,
Stuffing the ears of men with false reports.
I speak of peace while covert enmity
Under the smile of safety wounds the world.
And who but Rumor, who but only I,
Make fearful musters and prepared defense
Whiles the big year, swoll'n with some other grief,
Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war,
And no such matter? Rumor is a pipe
Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures,
And of so easy and so plain a stop
That the blunt monster with uncounted heads,
The still-discordant wav'ring multitude,
Can play upon it. But what need I thus
My well-known body to anatomize
Among my household? Why is Rumor here?
I run before King Harry's victory,
Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury
Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops,
Quenching the flame of bold rebellion
Even with the rebels' blood. But what mean I
To speak so true at first? My office is
To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell
Under the wrath of noble Hotspur's sword,
And that the King before the Douglas' rage
Stooped his anointed head as low as death.
This have I rumored through the peasant towns
Between that royal field of Shrewsbury
And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone,
Where Hotspur's father, old Northumberland,
Lies crafty-sick. The posts come tiring on,
And not a man of them brings other news
Than they have learnt of me. From Rumor's
tongues
They bring smooth comforts false, worse than
true wrongs.
[Rumor exits.]


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the Lord Bardolph at one door.]


LORD BARDOLPH
Who keeps the gate here, ho?

[Enter the Porter.]

Where is the Earl?

PORTER
What shall I say you are?

LORD BARDOLPH  Tell thou the Earl
That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.

PORTER
His Lordship is walked forth into the orchard.
Please it your Honor knock but at the gate
And he himself will answer.

[Enter the Earl Northumberland, his head wrapped in a
kerchief and supporting himself with a crutch.]


LORD BARDOLPH  Here comes the Earl.
[Porter exits.]

NORTHUMBERLAND
What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now
Should be the father of some stratagem.
The times are wild. Contention, like a horse
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose
And bears down all before him.

LORD BARDOLPH  Noble earl,
I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Good, an God will!

LORD BARDOLPH  As good as heart can wish.
The King is almost wounded to the death,
And, in the fortune of my lord your son,
Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts
Killed by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John
And Westmoreland and Stafford fled the field;
And Harry Monmouth's brawn, the hulk Sir John,
Is prisoner to your son. O, such a day,
So fought, so followed, and so fairly won,
Came not till now to dignify the times
Since Caesar's fortunes.

NORTHUMBERLAND  How is this derived?
Saw you the field? Came you from Shrewsbury?

LORD BARDOLPH
I spake with one, my lord, that came from thence,
A gentleman well bred and of good name,
That freely rendered me these news for true.

[Enter Travers.]


NORTHUMBERLAND
Here comes my servant Travers, who I sent
On Tuesday last to listen after news.

LORD BARDOLPH
My lord, I overrode him on the way,
And he is furnished with no certainties
More than he haply may retail from me.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you?

TRAVERS
My lord, Sir John Umfrevile turned me back
With joyful tidings and, being better horsed,
Outrode me. After him came spurring hard
A gentleman, almost forspent with speed,
That stopped by me to breathe his bloodied horse.
He asked the way to Chester, and of him
I did demand what news from Shrewsbury.
He told me that rebellion had bad luck
And that young Harry Percy's spur was cold.
With that he gave his able horse the head
And, bending forward, struck his armed heels
Against the panting sides of his poor jade
Up to the rowel-head, and starting so
He seemed in running to devour the way,
Staying no longer question.

NORTHUMBERLAND  Ha? Again:
Said he young Harry Percy's spur was cold?
Of Hotspur, Coldspur? That rebellion
Had met ill luck?

LORD BARDOLPH  My lord, I'll tell you what:
If my young lord your son have not the day,
Upon mine honor, for a silken point
I'll give my barony. Never talk of it.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers
Give then such instances of loss?

LORD BARDOLPH  Who, he?
He was some hilding fellow that had stol'n
The horse he rode on and, upon my life,
Spoke at a venture.

[Enter Morton.]

Look, here comes more news.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Yea, this man's brow, like to a title leaf,
Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.
So looks the strand whereon the imperious flood
Hath left a witnessed usurpation.--
Say, Morton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?

MORTON
I ran from Shrewsbury, my noble lord,
Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask
To fright our party.

NORTHUMBERLAND  How doth my son and brother?
Thou tremblest, and the whiteness in thy cheek
Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand.
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so woebegone,
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night
And would have told him half his Troy was burnt;
But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,
And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it.
This thou wouldst say: "Your son did thus and thus;
Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas"--
Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds.
But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,
Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise,
Ending with "Brother, son, and all are dead."

MORTON
Douglas is living, and your brother yet,
But for my lord your son--

NORTHUMBERLAND  Why, he is dead.
See what a ready tongue suspicion hath!
He that but fears the thing he would not know
Hath, by instinct, knowledge from others' eyes
That what he feared is chanced. Yet speak,
Morton.
Tell thou an earl his divination lies,
And I will take it as a sweet disgrace
And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.

MORTON
You are too great to be by me gainsaid,
Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Yet, for all this, say not that Percy's dead.
I see a strange confession in thine eye.
Thou shak'st thy head and hold'st it fear or sin
To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so.
The tongue offends not that reports his death;
And he doth sin that doth belie the dead,
Not he which says the dead is not alive.
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news
Hath but a losing office, and his tongue
Sounds ever after as a sullen bell
Remembered tolling a departing friend.

LORD BARDOLPH
I cannot think, my lord, your son is dead.

MORTON, [to Northumberland]
I am sorry I should force you to believe
That which I would to God I had not seen,
But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,
Rend'ring faint quittance, wearied and outbreathed,
To Harry Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down
The never-daunted Percy to the earth,
From whence with life he never more sprung up.
In few, his death, whose spirit lent a fire
Even to the dullest peasant in his camp,
Being bruited once, took fire and heat away
From the best-tempered courage in his troops;
For from his mettle was his party steeled,
Which, once in him abated, all the rest
Turned on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.
And as the thing that's heavy in itself
Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed,
So did our men, heavy in Hotspur's loss,
Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear
That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim
Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety,
Fly from the field. Then was that noble Worcester
So soon ta'en prisoner; and that furious Scot,
The bloody Douglas, whose well-laboring sword
Had three times slain th' appearance of the King,
Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame
Of those that turned their backs and in his flight,
Stumbling in fear, was took. The sum of all
Is that the King hath won and hath sent out
A speedy power to encounter you, my lord,
Under the conduct of young Lancaster
And Westmoreland. This is the news at full.

NORTHUMBERLAND
For this I shall have time enough to mourn.
In poison there is physic, and these news,
Having been well, that would have made me sick,
Being sick, have in some measure made me well.
And as the wretch whose fever-weakened joints,
Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life,
Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keeper's arms, even so my limbs,
Weakened with grief, being now enraged with
grief,
Are thrice themselves. Hence therefore, thou
nice crutch.	[He throws down his crutch.]
A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel
Must glove this hand. And hence, thou sickly
coif.	[He removes his kerchief.]
Thou art a guard too wanton for the head
Which princes, fleshed with conquest, aim to hit.
Now bind my brows with iron, and approach
The ragged'st hour that time and spite dare bring
To frown upon th' enraged Northumberland.
Let heaven kiss Earth! Now let not Nature's hand
Keep the wild flood confined. Let order die,
And let this world no longer be a stage
To feed contention in a lingering act;
But let one spirit of the firstborn Cain
Reign in all bosoms, that, each heart being set
On bloody courses, the rude scene may end,
And darkness be the burier of the dead.

LORD BARDOLPH
This strained passion doth you wrong, my lord.

MORTON
Sweet earl, divorce not wisdom from your honor.
The lives of all your loving complices
Lean on your health, the which, if you give o'er
To stormy passion, must perforce decay.
You cast th' event of war, my noble lord,
And summed the accompt of chance before you
said
"Let us make head." It was your presurmise
That in the dole of blows your son might drop.
You knew he walked o'er perils on an edge,
More likely to fall in than to get o'er.
You were advised his flesh was capable
Of wounds and scars, and that his forward spirit
Would lift him where most trade of danger
ranged.
Yet did you say "Go forth," and none of this,
Though strongly apprehended, could restrain
The stiff-borne action. What hath then befall'n,
Or what did this bold enterprise bring forth,
More than that being which was like to be?

LORD BARDOLPH
We all that are engaged to this loss
Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas
That if we wrought out life, 'twas ten to one;
And yet we ventured, for the gain proposed
Choked the respect of likely peril feared;
And since we are o'erset, venture again.
Come, we will all put forth, body and goods.

MORTON
'Tis more than time.--And, my most noble lord,
I hear for certain, and dare speak the truth:
The gentle Archbishop of York is up
With well-appointed powers. He is a man
Who with a double surety binds his followers.
My lord your son had only but the corpse,
But shadows and the shows of men, to fight;
For that same word "rebellion" did divide
The action of their bodies from their souls,
And they did fight with queasiness, constrained,
As men drink potions, that their weapons only
Seemed on our side. But, for their spirits and
souls,
This word "rebellion," it had froze them up
As fish are in a pond. But now the Bishop
Turns insurrection to religion.
Supposed sincere and holy in his thoughts,
He's followed both with body and with mind,
And doth enlarge his rising with the blood
Of fair King Richard, scraped from Pomfret
stones;
Derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause;
Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land,
Gasping for life under great Bolingbroke;
And more and less do flock to follow him.

NORTHUMBERLAND
I knew of this before, but, to speak truth,
This present grief had wiped it from my mind.
Go in with me and counsel every man
The aptest way for safety and revenge.
Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed.
Never so few, and never yet more need.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Sir John Falstaff, with his Page bearing his sword
and buckler.]


FALSTAFF  Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my
water?

PAGE  He said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy
water, but, for the party that owed it, he might have
more diseases than he knew for.

FALSTAFF  Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me.
The brain of this foolish-compounded clay, man, is
not able to invent anything that intends to laughter
more than I invent, or is invented on me. I am not
only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in
other men. I do here walk before thee like a sow
that hath overwhelmed all her litter but one. If the
Prince put thee into my service for any other reason
than to set me off, why then I have no judgment.
Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be
worn in my cap than to wait at my heels. I was never
manned with an agate till now, but I will inset you
neither in gold nor silver, but in vile apparel, and
send you back again to your master for a jewel. The
juvenal, the Prince your master, whose chin is not
yet fledge--I will sooner have a beard grow in the
palm of my hand than he shall get one off his cheek,
and yet he will not stick to say his face is a face
royal. God may finish it when He will. 'Tis not a hair
amiss yet. He may keep it still at a face royal, for a
barber shall never earn sixpence out of it, and yet
he'll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his
father was a bachelor. He may keep his own grace,
but he's almost out of mine, I can assure him. What
said Master Dommelton about the satin for my
short cloak and my slops?

PAGE  He said, sir, you should procure him better
assurance than Bardolph. He would not take his
band and yours. He liked not the security.

FALSTAFF  Let him be damned like the glutton! Pray
God his tongue be hotter! A whoreson Achitophel, a
rascally yea-forsooth knave, to bear a gentleman in
hand and then stand upon security! The whoreson
smoothy-pates do now wear nothing but high shoes
and bunches of keys at their girdles; and if a man is
through with them in honest taking up, then they
must stand upon security. I had as lief they would
put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop it with
"security." I looked he should have sent me two-and-twenty
yards of satin, as I am a true knight, and
he sends me "security." Well, he may sleep in
security, for he hath the horn of abundance, and the
lightness of his wife shines through it, and yet
cannot he see though he have his own lantern to
light him. Where's Bardolph?

PAGE  He's gone in Smithfield to buy your Worship a
horse.

FALSTAFF  I bought him in Paul's, and he'll buy me a
horse in Smithfield. An I could get me but a wife in
the stews, I were manned, horsed, and wived.

[Enter Lord Chief Justice and Servant.]


PAGE, [to Falstaff]  Sir, here comes the nobleman that
committed the Prince for striking him about
Bardolph.

FALSTAFF  Wait close. I will not see him.
[They begin to exit.]

CHIEF JUSTICE, [to Servant]  What's he that goes there?

SERVANT  Falstaff, an 't please your Lordship.

CHIEF JUSTICE  He that was in question for the robbery?

SERVANT  He, my lord; but he hath since done good
service at Shrewsbury, and, as I hear, is now going
with some charge to the Lord John of Lancaster.

CHIEF JUSTICE  What, to York? Call him back again.

SERVANT  Sir John Falstaff!

FALSTAFF  Boy, tell him I am deaf.

PAGE  You must speak louder. My master is deaf.

CHIEF JUSTICE  I am sure he is, to the hearing of
anything good.--Go pluck him by the elbow. I must
speak with him.

SERVANT, [plucking Falstaff's sleeve]  Sir John!

FALSTAFF  What, a young knave and begging? Is there
not wars? Is there not employment? Doth not the
King lack subjects? Do not the rebels need soldiers?
Though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is
worse shame to beg than to be on the worst side,
were it worse than the name of rebellion can tell
how to make it.

SERVANT  You mistake me, sir.

FALSTAFF  Why sir, did I say you were an honest man?
Setting my knighthood and my soldiership aside, I
had lied in my throat if I had said so.

SERVANT  I pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and
your soldiership aside, and give me leave to tell you,
you lie in your throat if you say I am any other than
an honest man.

FALSTAFF  I give thee leave to tell me so? I lay aside that
which grows to me? If thou gett'st any leave of me,
hang me; if thou tak'st leave, thou wert better be
hanged. You hunt counter. Hence! Avaunt!

SERVANT  Sir, my lord would speak with you.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Sir John Falstaff, a word with you.

FALSTAFF  My good lord. God give your Lordship good
time of the day. I am glad to see your Lordship
abroad. I heard say your Lordship was sick. I hope
your Lordship goes abroad by advice. Your Lordship,
though not clean past your youth, have yet
some smack of an ague in you, some relish of the
saltness of time in you, and I most humbly beseech
your Lordship to have a reverend care of your
health.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Sir John, I sent for you before your
expedition to Shrewsbury.

FALSTAFF  An 't please your Lordship, I hear his Majesty
is returned with some discomfort from Wales.

CHIEF JUSTICE  I talk not of his Majesty. You would not
come when I sent for you.

FALSTAFF  And I hear, moreover, his Highness is fallen
into this same whoreson apoplexy.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Well, God mend him. I pray you let me
speak with you.

FALSTAFF  This apoplexy, as I take it, is a kind of
lethargy, an 't please your Lordship, a kind of
sleeping in the blood, a whoreson tingling.

CHIEF JUSTICE  What tell you me of it? Be it as it is.

FALSTAFF  It hath it original from much grief, from
study, and perturbation of the brain. I have read the
cause of his effects in Galen. It is a kind of deafness.

CHIEF JUSTICE  I think you are fallen into the disease,
for you hear not what I say to you.

FALSTAFF  Very well, my lord, very well. Rather, an 't
please you, it is the disease of not listening, the
malady of not marking, that I am troubled withal.

CHIEF JUSTICE  To punish you by the heels would amend
the attention of your ears, and I care not if I do
become your physician.

FALSTAFF  I am as poor as Job, my lord, but not so
patient. Your Lordship may minister the potion of
imprisonment to me in respect of poverty, but how
I should be your patient to follow your prescriptions,
the wise may make some dram of a scruple,
or indeed a scruple itself.

CHIEF JUSTICE  I sent for you, when there were matters
against you for your life, to come speak with me.

FALSTAFF  As I was then advised by my learned counsel
in the laws of this land-service, I did not come.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Well, the truth is, Sir John, you live in
great infamy.

FALSTAFF  He that buckles himself in my belt cannot
live in less.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Your means are very slender, and your
waste is great.

FALSTAFF  I would it were otherwise. I would my means
were greater and my waist slender.

CHIEF JUSTICE  You have misled the youthful prince.

FALSTAFF  The young prince hath misled me. I am the
fellow with the great belly, and he my dog.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Well, I am loath to gall a new-healed
wound. Your day's service at Shrewsbury hath a
little gilded over your night's exploit on Gad's Hill.
You may thank th' unquiet time for your quiet
o'erposting that action.

FALSTAFF  My lord.

CHIEF JUSTICE  But since all is well, keep it so. Wake not
a sleeping wolf.

FALSTAFF  To wake a wolf is as bad as to smell a fox.

CHIEF JUSTICE  What, you are as a candle, the better
part burnt out.

FALSTAFF  A wassail candle, my lord, all tallow. If I did
say of wax, my growth would approve the truth.

CHIEF JUSTICE  There is not a white hair in your face but
should have his effect of gravity.

FALSTAFF  His effect of gravy, gravy, gravy.

CHIEF JUSTICE  You follow the young prince up and
down like his ill angel.

FALSTAFF  Not so, my lord. Your ill angel is light, but I
hope he that looks upon me will take me without
weighing. And yet in some respects I grant I cannot
go. I cannot tell. Virtue is of so little regard in these
costermongers' times that true valor is turned bearherd;
pregnancy is made a tapster, and hath his
quick wit wasted in giving reckonings. All the other
gifts appurtenant to man, as the malice of this age
shapes them, are not worth a gooseberry. You that
are old consider not the capacities of us that are
young. You do measure the heat of our livers with
the bitterness of your galls, and we that are in the
vaward of our youth, I must confess, are wags too.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Do you set down your name in the scroll
of youth, that are written down old with all the
characters of age? Have you not a moist eye, a dry
hand, a yellow cheek, a white beard, a decreasing
leg, an increasing belly? Is not your voice broken,
your wind short, your chin double, your wit single,
and every part about you blasted with antiquity?
And will you yet call yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir
John.

FALSTAFF  My lord, I was born about three of the clock
in the afternoon, with a white head and something
a round belly. For my voice, I have lost it with
halloing and singing of anthems. To approve my
youth further, I will not. The truth is, I am only old
in judgment and understanding. And he that will
caper with me for a thousand marks, let him lend
me the money, and have at him. For the box of the
ear that the Prince gave you, he gave it like a rude
prince, and you took it like a sensible lord. I have
checked him for it, and the young lion repents.
[Aside.] Marry, not in ashes and sackcloth, but in
new silk and old sack.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Well, God send the Prince a better
companion.

FALSTAFF  God send the companion a better prince. I
cannot rid my hands of him.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Well, the King hath severed you and
Prince Harry. I hear you are going with Lord John
of Lancaster against the Archbishop and the Earl of
Northumberland.

FALSTAFF  Yea, I thank your pretty sweet wit for it. But
look you pray, all you that kiss my Lady Peace at
home, that our armies join not in a hot day, for, by
the Lord, I take but two shirts out with me, and I
mean not to sweat extraordinarily. If it be a hot day
and I brandish anything but a bottle, I would I
might never spit white again. There is not a dangerous
action can peep out his head but I am thrust
upon it. Well, I cannot last ever. But it was always
yet the trick of our English nation, if they have a
good thing, to make it too common. If you will
needs say I am an old man, you should give me rest.
I would to God my name were not so terrible to the
enemy as it is. I were better to be eaten to death
with a rust than to be scoured to nothing with
perpetual motion.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Well, be honest, be honest, and God
bless your expedition.

FALSTAFF  Will your Lordship lend me a thousand
pound to furnish me forth?

CHIEF JUSTICE  Not a penny, not a penny. You are too
impatient to bear crosses. Fare you well. Commend
me to my cousin Westmoreland.
[Lord Chief Justice and his Servant exit.]

FALSTAFF  If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. A
man can no more separate age and covetousness
than he can part young limbs and lechery; but the
gout galls the one, and the pox pinches the other,
and so both the degrees prevent my curses.--Boy!

PAGE  Sir.

FALSTAFF  What money is in my purse?

PAGE  Seven groats and two pence.

FALSTAFF  I can get no remedy against this consumption
of the purse. Borrowing only lingers and lingers
it out, but the disease is incurable. [Giving
papers to the Page.] Go bear this letter to my Lord
of Lancaster, this to the Prince, this to the Earl
of Westmoreland, and this to old Mistress Ursula,
whom I have weekly sworn to marry since I perceived
the first white hair of my chin. About it. You
know where to find me. [Page exits.] A pox of this
gout! Or a gout of this pox, for the one or the other
plays the rogue with my great toe. 'Tis no matter if I
do halt. I have the wars for my color, and my
pension shall seem the more reasonable. A good wit
will make use of anything. I will turn diseases to
commodity.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter th' Archbishop of York, Thomas Mowbray (Earl
Marshal), the Lord Hastings, and Lord Bardolph.]


ARCHBISHOP
Thus have you heard our cause and known our
means,
And, my most noble friends, I pray you all
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes.
And first, Lord Marshal, what say you to it?

MOWBRAY
I well allow the occasion of our arms,
But gladly would be better satisfied
How in our means we should advance ourselves
To look with forehead bold and big enough
Upon the power and puissance of the King.

HASTINGS
Our present musters grow upon the file
To five-and-twenty thousand men of choice,
And our supplies live largely in the hope
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns
With an incensed fire of injuries.

LORD BARDOLPH
The question, then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus:
Whether our present five-and-twenty thousand
May hold up head without Northumberland.

HASTINGS
With him we may.

LORD BARDOLPH  Yea, marry, there's the point.
But if without him we be thought too feeble,
My judgment is we should not step too far
Till we had his assistance by the hand.
For in a theme so bloody-faced as this,
Conjecture, expectation, and surmise
Of aids incertain should not be admitted.

ARCHBISHOP
'Tis very true, Lord Bardolph, for indeed
It was young Hotspur's cause at Shrewsbury.

LORD BARDOLPH
It was, my lord; who lined himself with hope,
Eating the air and promise of supply,
Flatt'ring himself in project of a power
Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts,
And so, with great imagination
Proper to madmen, led his powers to death
And, winking, leapt into destruction.

HASTINGS
But, by your leave, it never yet did hurt
To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope.

LORD BARDOLPH
Yes, if this present quality of war --
Indeed the instant action, a cause on foot--
Lives so in hope, as in an early spring
We see th' appearing buds, which to prove fruit
Hope gives not so much warrant as despair
That frosts will bite them. When we mean to build,
We first survey the plot, then draw the model,
And when we see the figure of the house,
Then must we rate the cost of the erection,
Which if we find outweighs ability,
What do we then but draw anew the model
In fewer offices, or at least desist
To build at all? Much more in this great work,
Which is almost to pluck a kingdom down
And set another up, should we survey
The plot of situation and the model,
Consent upon a sure foundation,
Question surveyors, know our own estate,
How able such a work to undergo,
To weigh against his opposite. Or else
We fortify in paper and in figures,
Using the names of men instead of men,
Like one that draws the model of an house
Beyond his power to build it, who, half through,
Gives o'er and leaves his part-created cost
A naked subject to the weeping clouds
And waste for churlish winter's tyranny.

HASTINGS
Grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth,
Should be stillborn and that we now possessed
The utmost man of expectation,
I think we are a body strong enough,
Even as we are, to equal with the King.

LORD BARDOLPH
What, is the King but five-and-twenty thousand?

HASTINGS
To us no more, nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph,
For his divisions, as the times do brawl,
Are in three heads: one power against the French,
And one against Glendower; perforce a third
Must take up us. So is the unfirm king
In three divided, and his coffers sound
With hollow poverty and emptiness.

ARCHBISHOP
That he should draw his several strengths together
And come against us in full puissance
Need not to be dreaded.

HASTINGS  If he should do so,
He leaves his back unarmed, the French and Welsh
Baying him at the heels. Never fear that.

LORD BARDOLPH
Who is it like should lead his forces hither?

HASTINGS
The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland;
Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth;
But who is substituted against the French
I have no certain notice.

ARCHBISHOP  Let us on,
And publish the occasion of our arms.
The commonwealth is sick of their own choice.
Their over-greedy love hath surfeited.
An habitation giddy and unsure
Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.
O thou fond many, with what loud applause
Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke
Before he was what thou wouldst have him be.
And being now trimmed in thine own desires,
Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him
That thou provok'st thyself to cast him up.
So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge
Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard,
And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up
And howl'st to find it. What trust is in these
times?
They that, when Richard lived, would have him die
Are now become enamored on his grave.
Thou, that threw'st dust upon his goodly head
When through proud London he came sighing on
After th' admired heels of Bolingbroke,
Criest now "O earth, yield us that king again,
And take thou this!" O thoughts of men accursed!
Past and to come seems best; things present,
worst.

MOWBRAY
Shall we go draw our numbers and set on?

HASTINGS
We are time's subjects, and time bids begone.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Hostess Quickly of the tavern with two Officers,
Fang and Snare, who lags behind.]


HOSTESS  Master Fang, have you entered the action?

FANG  It is entered.

HOSTESS  Where's your yeoman? Is 't a lusty yeoman?
Will he stand to 't?

FANG, [calling]  Sirrah! Where's Snare?

HOSTESS  O Lord, ay, good Master Snare.

SNARE, [catching up to them]  Here, here.

FANG  Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff.

HOSTESS  Yea, good Master Snare, I have entered him
and all.

SNARE  It may chance cost some of us our lives, for he
will stab.

HOSTESS  Alas the day, take heed of him. He stabbed me
in mine own house, and that most beastly, in good
faith. He cares not what mischief he does. If his
weapon be out, he will foin like any devil. He will
spare neither man, woman, nor child.

FANG  If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.

HOSTESS  No, nor I neither. I'll be at your elbow.

FANG  An I but fist him once, an he come but within my
view--

HOSTESS  I am undone by his going. I warrant you, he's
an infinitive thing upon my score. Good Master
Fang, hold him sure. Good Master Snare, let him
not 'scape. He comes continuantly to Pie Corner,
saving your manhoods, to buy a saddle, and he is
indited to dinner to the Lubber's Head in Lumbert
Street, to Master Smooth's the silkman. I pray you,
since my exion is entered, and my case so openly
known to the world, let him be brought in to his
answer. A hundred mark is a long one for a poor
lone woman to bear, and I have borne, and borne,
and borne, and have been fubbed off, and fubbed
off, and fubbed off from this day to that day, that it is
a shame to be thought on. There is no honesty in
such dealing, unless a woman should be made an
ass and a beast to bear every knave's wrong. Yonder
he comes, and that arrant malmsey-nose knave,
Bardolph, with him. Do your offices, do your offices,
Master Fang and Master Snare, do me, do me,
do me your offices.

[Enter Sir John Falstaff and Bardolph, and the Page.]


FALSTAFF  How now, whose mare's dead? What's the
matter?

FANG  Sir John, I arrest you at the suit of Mistress
Quickly.

FALSTAFF  Away, varlets!--Draw, Bardolph. Cut me off
the villain's head. Throw the quean in the
channel.	[They draw.]

HOSTESS  Throw me in the channel? I'll throw thee in
the channel. Wilt thou, wilt thou, thou bastardly
rogue?--Murder, murder!--Ah, thou honeysuckle
villain, wilt thou kill God's officers and the King's?
Ah, thou honeyseed rogue, thou art a honeyseed, a
man-queller, and a woman-queller.

FALSTAFF  Keep them off, Bardolph.

OFFICERS  A rescue, a rescue!

HOSTESS  Good people, bring a rescue or two.--Thou
wot, wot thou? Thou wot, wot ta? Do, do, thou
rogue. Do, thou hempseed.

PAGE  Away, you scullion, you rampallian, you fustilarian!
I'll tickle your catastrophe.

[Enter Lord Chief Justice and his Men.]


CHIEF JUSTICE
What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!

HOSTESS  Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you
stand to me.

CHIEF JUSTICE
How now, Sir John? What, are you brawling here?
Doth this become your place, your time, and
business?
You should have been well on your way to York.--
Stand from him, fellow. Wherefore hang'st thou
upon him?

HOSTESS  O my most worshipful lord, an 't please your
Grace, I am a poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is
arrested at my suit.

CHIEF JUSTICE  For what sum?

HOSTESS  It is more than for some, my lord; it is for all I
have. He hath eaten me out of house and home. He
hath put all my substance into that fat belly of his.
[To Falstaff.] But I will have some of it out again, or I
will ride thee o' nights like the mare.

FALSTAFF  I think I am as like to ride the mare if I have
any vantage of ground to get up.

CHIEF JUSTICE  How comes this, Sir John? Fie, what
man of good temper would endure this tempest of
exclamation? Are you not ashamed to enforce a
poor widow to so rough a course to come by her
own?

FALSTAFF  What is the gross sum that I owe thee?

HOSTESS  Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself
and the money too. Thou didst swear to me upon a
parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in my Dolphin chamber at
the round table by a sea-coal fire, upon Wednesday
in Wheeson week, when the Prince broke thy head
for liking his father to a singing-man of Windsor,
thou didst swear to me then, as I was washing thy
wound, to marry me and make me my lady thy wife.
Canst thou deny it? Did not Goodwife Keech, the
butcher's wife, come in then and call me Gossip
Quickly, coming in to borrow a mess of vinegar,
telling us she had a good dish of prawns, whereby
thou didst desire to eat some, whereby I told thee
they were ill for a green wound? And didst thou not,
when she was gone downstairs, desire me to be no
more so familiarity with such poor people, saying
that ere long they should call me madam? And didst
thou not kiss me and bid me fetch thee thirty
shillings? I put thee now to thy book-oath. Deny it if
thou canst.

FALSTAFF  My lord, this is a poor mad soul, and she says
up and down the town that her eldest son is like
you. She hath been in good case, and the truth is,
poverty hath distracted her. But, for these foolish
officers, I beseech you I may have redress against
them.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Sir John, Sir John, I am well acquainted
with your manner of wrenching the true cause the
false way. It is not a confident brow, nor the throng
of words that come with such more than impudent
sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level
consideration. You have, as it appears to me, practiced
upon the easy-yielding spirit of this woman,
and made her serve your uses both in purse and in
person.

HOSTESS  Yea, in truth, my lord.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Pray thee, peace.--Pay her the debt you
owe her, and unpay the villainy you have done with
her. The one you may do with sterling money, and
the other with current repentance.

FALSTAFF  My lord, I will not undergo this sneap without
reply. You call honorable boldness "impudent
sauciness." If a man will make curtsy and say
nothing, he is virtuous. No, my lord, my humble
duty remembered, I will not be your suitor. I say to
you, I do desire deliverance from these officers,
being upon hasty employment in the King's affairs.

CHIEF JUSTICE  You speak as having power to do wrong;
but answer in th' effect of your reputation, and
satisfy the poor woman.

FALSTAFF  Come hither, hostess.
[He speaks aside to the Hostess.]

[Enter a Messenger, Master Gower.]


CHIEF JUSTICE  Now, Master Gower, what news?

GOWER
The King, my lord, and Harry Prince of Wales
Are near at hand. The rest the paper tells.
[He gives the Chief Justice a paper to read.]

FALSTAFF, [to the Hostess]  As I am a gentleman!

HOSTESS  Faith, you said so before.

FALSTAFF  As I am a gentleman. Come. No more words
of it.

HOSTESS  By this heavenly ground I tread on, I must be
fain to pawn both my plate and the tapestry of my
dining chambers.

FALSTAFF  Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking. And for
thy walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the
Prodigal or the German hunting in waterwork is
worth a thousand of these bed-hangers and these
fly-bitten tapestries. Let it be ten pound, if thou
canst. Come, an 'twere not for thy humors, there's
not a better wench in England. Go wash thy face,
and draw the action. Come, thou must not be in this
humor with me. Dost not know me? Come, come. I
know thou wast set on to this.

HOSTESS  Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty
nobles. I' faith, I am loath to pawn my plate, so God
save me, la.

FALSTAFF  Let it alone. I'll make other shift. You'll be a
fool still.

HOSTESS  Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my
gown. I hope you'll come to supper. You'll pay
me all together?

FALSTAFF  Will I live? [Aside to Bardolph.] Go with her,
with her. Hook on, hook on.

HOSTESS  Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at
supper?

FALSTAFF  No more words. Let's have her.
[Hostess, Fang, Snare, Bardolph, Page,
and others exit.]

CHIEF JUSTICE, [to Gower]  I have heard better news.

FALSTAFF, [to Chief Justice]  What's the news, my good
lord?

CHIEF JUSTICE, [to Gower]  Where lay the King
tonight?

GOWER  At Basingstoke, my lord.

FALSTAFF, [to Chief Justice]  I hope, my lord, all's
well. What is the news, my lord?

CHIEF JUSTICE, [to Gower]  Come all his forces back?

GOWER
No. Fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse
Are marched up to my Lord of Lancaster
Against Northumberland and the Archbishop.

FALSTAFF, [to Chief Justice]
Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?

CHIEF JUSTICE, [to Gower]
You shall have letters of me presently.
Come. Go along with me, good Master Gower.

FALSTAFF  My lord!

CHIEF JUSTICE  What's the matter?

FALSTAFF  Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to
dinner?

GOWER  I must wait upon my good lord here. I thank
you, good Sir John.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Sir John, you loiter here too long, being
you are to take soldiers up in counties as you go.

FALSTAFF  Will you sup with me, Master Gower?

CHIEF JUSTICE  What foolish master taught you these
manners, Sir John?

FALSTAFF  Master Gower, if they become me not, he was
a fool that taught them me.--This is the right
fencing grace, my lord: tap for tap, and so part fair.

CHIEF JUSTICE  Now the Lord lighten thee. Thou art a
great fool.
[They separate and exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter the Prince and Poins.]


PRINCE  Before God, I am exceeding weary.

POINS  Is 't come to that? I had thought weariness durst
not have attached one of so high blood.

PRINCE  Faith, it does me, though it discolors the complexion
of my greatness to acknowledge it. Doth it
not show vilely in me to desire small beer?

POINS  Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied
as to remember so weak a composition.

PRINCE  Belike then my appetite was not princely got,
for, by my troth, I do now remember the poor
creature small beer. But indeed these humble considerations
make me out of love with my greatness.
What a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name,
or to know thy face tomorrow, or to take note how
many pair of silk stockings thou hast--with these,
and those that were thy peach-colored ones--or to
bear the inventory of thy shirts, as, one for superfluity
and another for use. But that the tennis-court
keeper knows better than I, for it is a low ebb of
linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there,
as thou hast not done a great while, because the rest
of the low countries have made a shift to eat up thy
holland; and God knows whether those that bawl
out the ruins of thy linen shall inherit His kingdom;
but the midwives say the children are not in the
fault, whereupon the world increases and kindreds
are mightily strengthened.

POINS  How ill it follows, after you have labored so
hard, you should talk so idly! Tell me, how many
good young princes would do so, their fathers being
so sick as yours at this time is?

PRINCE  Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins?

POINS  Yes, faith, and let it be an excellent good thing.

PRINCE  It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding
than thine.

POINS  Go to. I stand the push of your one thing that
you will tell.

PRINCE  Marry, I tell thee it is not meet that I should be
sad, now my father is sick--albeit I could tell to
thee, as to one it pleases me, for fault of a better, to
call my friend, I could be sad, and sad indeed too.

POINS  Very hardly, upon such a subject.

PRINCE  By this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the
devil's book as thou and Falstaff for obduracy and
persistency. Let the end try the man. But I tell thee,
my heart bleeds inwardly that my father is so sick;
and keeping such vile company as thou art hath in
reason taken from me all ostentation of sorrow.

POINS  The reason?

PRINCE  What wouldst thou think of me if I should
weep?

POINS  I would think thee a most princely hypocrite.

PRINCE  It would be every man's thought, and thou art
a blessed fellow to think as every man thinks. Never
a man's thought in the world keeps the roadway
better than thine. Every man would think me an
hypocrite indeed. And what accites your most worshipful
thought to think so?

POINS  Why, because you have been so lewd and so
much engraffed to Falstaff.

PRINCE  And to thee.

POINS  By this light, I am well spoke on. I can hear it
with mine own ears. The worst that they can say of
me is that I am a second brother, and that I am a
proper fellow of my hands; and those two things, I
confess, I cannot help. By the Mass, here comes
Bardolph.

[Enter Bardolph and Page.]


PRINCE  And the boy that I gave Falstaff. He had him
from me Christian, and look if the fat villain have
not transformed him ape.

BARDOLPH  God save your Grace.

PRINCE  And yours, most noble Bardolph.

POINS, [to Bardolph]  Come, you virtuous ass, you bashful
fool, must you be blushing? Wherefore blush
you now? What a maidenly man-at-arms are you
become! Is 't such a matter to get a pottle-pot's
maidenhead?

PAGE  He calls me e'en now, my lord, through a red
lattice, and I could discern no part of his face from
the window. At last I spied his eyes, and methought
he had made two holes in the ale-wife's new
petticoat and so peeped through.

PRINCE  Has not the boy profited?

BARDOLPH, [to Page]  Away, you whoreson upright rabbit,
away!

PAGE  Away, you rascally Althea's dream, away!

PRINCE  Instruct us, boy. What dream, boy?

PAGE  Marry, my lord, Althea dreamt she was delivered
of a firebrand, and therefore I call him her dream.

PRINCE  A crown's worth of good interpretation. There
'tis, boy.	[He gives the Page money.]

POINS  O, that this good blossom could be kept from
cankers! Well, there is sixpence to preserve thee.
[He gives the Page money.]

BARDOLPH  An you do not make him be hanged among
you, the gallows shall have wrong.

PRINCE  And how doth thy master, Bardolph?

BARDOLPH  Well, my good lord. He heard of your
Grace's coming to town. There's a letter for you.
[He gives the Prince a paper.]

POINS  Delivered with good respect. And how doth the
Martlemas your master?

BARDOLPH  In bodily health, sir.

POINS  Marry, the immortal part needs a physician, but
that moves not him. Though that be sick, it dies not.

PRINCE  I do allow this wen to be as familiar with me as
my dog, and he holds his place, for look you how he
writes.	[He shows the letter to Poins.]

POINS [reads the superscription]  John Falstaff, knight.
Every man must know that as oft as he has occasion
to name himself, even like those that are kin to the
King, for they never prick their finger but they say
"There's some of the King's blood spilt." "How
comes that?" says he that takes upon him not to
conceive. The answer is as ready as a borrower's
cap: "I am the King's poor cousin, sir."

PRINCE  Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it
from Japheth. But to the letter: [Reads.] Sir John
Falstaff, knight, to the son of the King nearest his
father, Harry Prince of Wales, greeting.

POINS  Why, this is a certificate.

PRINCE  Peace!
[Reads.] I will imitate the honorable Romans in
brevity.

POINS  He sure means brevity in breath, short-winded.

PRINCE [reads]  I commend me to thee, I commend thee,
and I leave thee. Be not too familiar with Poins, for he
misuses thy favors so much that he swears thou art to
marry his sister Nell. Repent at idle times as thou
mayst, and so farewell.
	Thine by yea and no, which is as much as
to say, as thou usest him,
Jack Falstaff with my familiars,
John with my brothers and sisters, and
Sir John with all Europe.

POINS  My lord, I'll steep this letter in sack and make
him eat it.

PRINCE  That's to make him eat twenty of his words.
But do you use me thus, Ned? Must I marry your
sister?

POINS  God send the wench no worse fortune! But I
never said so.

PRINCE  Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and
the spirits of the wise sit in the clouds and mock us.
[To Bardolph.] Is your master here in London?

BARDOLPH  Yea, my lord.

PRINCE  Where sups he? Doth the old boar feed in the
old frank?

BARDOLPH  At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap.

PRINCE  What company?

PAGE  Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.

PRINCE  Sup any women with him?

PAGE  None, my lord, but old Mistress Quickly and
Mistress Doll Tearsheet.

PRINCE  What pagan may that be?

PAGE  A proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of
my master's.

PRINCE  Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the
town bull.--Shall we steal upon them, Ned, at
supper?

POINS  I am your shadow, my lord. I'll follow you.

PRINCE  Sirrah--you, boy--and Bardolph, no word to
your master that I am yet come to town. There's for
your silence.	[He gives money.]

BARDOLPH  I have no tongue, sir.

PAGE  And for mine, sir, I will govern it.

PRINCE  Fare you well. Go.	[Bardolph and Page exit.]
This Doll Tearsheet should be some road.

POINS  I warrant you, as common as the way between
Saint Albans and London.

PRINCE  How might we see Falstaff bestow himself
tonight in his true colors, and not ourselves be
seen?

POINS  Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and
wait upon him at his table as drawers.

PRINCE  From a god to a bull: a heavy descension. It
was Jove's case. From a prince to a 'prentice: a low
transformation that shall be mine, for in everything
the purpose must weigh with the folly. Follow me,
Ned.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Northumberland, his wife, and the wife to
Harry Percy.]


NORTHUMBERLAND
I pray thee, loving wife and gentle daughter,
Give even way unto my rough affairs.
Put not you on the visage of the times
And be, like them, to Percy troublesome.

LADY NORTHUMBERLAND
I have given over. I will speak no more.
Do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Alas, sweet wife, my honor is at pawn,
And, but my going, nothing can redeem it.

LADY PERCY
O yet, for God's sake, go not to these wars.
The time was, father, that you broke your word
When you were more endeared to it than now,
When your own Percy, when my heart's dear Harry,
Threw many a northward look to see his father
Bring up his powers; but he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
There were two honors lost, yours and your son's.
For yours, the God of heaven brighten it.
For his, it stuck upon him as the sun
In the gray vault of heaven, and by his light
Did all the chivalry of England move
To do brave acts. He was indeed the glass
Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves.
He had no legs that practiced not his gait;
And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish,
Became the accents of the valiant;
For those that could speak low and tardily
Would turn their own perfection to abuse
To seem like him. So that in speech, in gait,
In diet, in affections of delight,
In military rules, humors of blood,
He was the mark and glass, copy and book,
That fashioned others. And him--O wondrous him!
O miracle of men!--him did you leave,
Second to none, unseconded by you,
To look upon the hideous god of war
In disadvantage, to abide a field
Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur's name
Did seem defensible. So you left him.
Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong
To hold your honor more precise and nice
With others than with him. Let them alone.
The Marshal and the Archbishop are strong.
Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers,
Today might I, hanging on Hotspur's neck,
Have talked of Monmouth's grave.

NORTHUMBERLAND  Beshrew your
heart,
Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me
With new lamenting ancient oversights.
But I must go and meet with danger there,
Or it will seek me in another place
And find me worse provided.

LADY NORTHUMBERLAND  O, fly to Scotland
Till that the nobles and the armed commons
Have of their puissance made a little taste.

LADY PERCY
If they get ground and vantage of the King,
Then join you with them like a rib of steel
To make strength stronger; but, for all our loves,
First let them try themselves. So did your son;
He was so suffered. So came I a widow,
And never shall have length of life enough
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes
That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven
For recordation to my noble husband.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Come, come, go in with me. 'Tis with my mind
As with the tide swelled up unto his height,
That makes a still-stand, running neither way.
Fain would I go to meet the Archbishop,
But many thousand reasons hold me back.
I will resolve for Scotland. There am I
Till time and vantage crave my company.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Francis and another Drawer.]


FRANCIS  What the devil hast thou brought there--
applejohns? Thou knowest Sir John cannot endure
an applejohn.

SECOND DRAWER  Mass, thou sayst true. The Prince
once set a dish of applejohns before him and told
him there were five more Sir Johns and, putting off
his hat, said "I will now take my leave of these six
dry, round, old, withered knights." It angered him
to the heart. But he hath forgot that.

FRANCIS  Why then, cover and set them down, and see if
thou canst find out Sneak's noise. Mistress Tearsheet
would fain hear some music. Dispatch. The
room where they supped is too hot. They'll come in
straight.

[Enter Will.]


WILL  Sirrah, here will be the Prince and Master
Poins anon, and they will put on two of our jerkins
and aprons, and Sir John must not know of it.
Bardolph hath brought word.

SECOND DRAWER  By the Mass, here will be old utis. It
will be an excellent stratagem.

FRANCIS  I'll see if I can find out Sneak.
[He exits with the Second Drawer.]

[Enter Hostess and Doll Tearsheet.]


HOSTESS  I' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in
an excellent good temperality. Your pulsidge beats
as extraordinarily as heart would desire, and your
color, I warrant you, is as red as any rose, in good
truth, la. But, i' faith, you have drunk too much
canaries, and that's a marvellous searching wine,
and it perfumes the blood ere one can say "What's
this?" How do you now?

DOLL  Better than I was. Hem.

HOSTESS  Why, that's well said. A good heart's worth
gold. Lo, here comes Sir John.

[Enter Sir John Falstaff.]


FALSTAFF, [singing]
When Arthur first in court--
[To Will.] Empty the jordan.	[Will exits.]
And was a worthy king--
How now, Mistress Doll?

HOSTESS  Sick of a calm, yea, good faith.

FALSTAFF  So is all her sect. An they be once in a calm,
they are sick.

DOLL  A pox damn you, you muddy rascal. Is that all the
comfort you give me?

FALSTAFF  You make fat rascals, Mistress Doll.

DOLL  I make them? Gluttony and diseases make them;
I make them not.

FALSTAFF  If the cook help to make the gluttony, you
help to make the diseases, Doll. We catch of you,
Doll, we catch of you. Grant that, my poor virtue,
grant that.

DOLL  Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.

FALSTAFF  Your brooches, pearls, and ouches--for to
serve bravely is to come halting off, you know; to
come off the breach with his pike bent bravely, and
to surgery bravely, to venture upon the charged
chambers bravely--

DOLL  Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!

HOSTESS  By my troth, this is the old fashion. You two
never meet but you fall to some discord. You are
both, i' good truth, as rheumatic as two dry toasts.
You cannot one bear with another's confirmities.
What the good-year! One must bear, and [to Doll]
that must be you. You are the weaker vessel, as they
say, the emptier vessel.

DOLL  Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full
hogshead? There's a whole merchant's venture of
Bordeaux stuff in him. You have not seen a hulk
better stuffed in the hold.--Come, I'll be friends
with thee, Jack. Thou art going to the wars, and
whether I shall ever see thee again or no, there is
nobody cares.

[Enter Drawer.]


DRAWER  Sir, Ancient Pistol's below and would speak
with you.

DOLL  Hang him, swaggering rascal! Let him not come
hither. It is the foul-mouthed'st rogue in England.

HOSTESS  If he swagger, let him not come here. No, by
my faith, I must live among my neighbors. I'll no
swaggerers. I am in good name and fame with the
very best. Shut the door. There comes no swaggerers
here. I have not lived all this while to have
swaggering now. Shut the door, I pray you.

FALSTAFF  Dost thou hear, hostess?

HOSTESS  Pray you pacify yourself, Sir John. There
comes no swaggerers here.

FALSTAFF  Dost thou hear? It is mine ancient.

HOSTESS  Tilly-vally, Sir John, ne'er tell me. And your
ancient swaggerer comes not in my doors. I was
before Master Tisick the debuty t' other day, and, as
he said to me--'twas no longer ago than Wednesday
last, i' good faith--"Neighbor Quickly," says
he--Master Dumb, our minister, was by then--
"Neighbor Quickly," says he, "receive those that
are civil, for," said he, "you are in an ill name."
Now he said so, I can tell whereupon. "For," says
he, "you are an honest woman, and well thought
on. Therefore take heed what guests you receive.
Receive," says he, "no swaggering companions."
There comes none here. You would bless you to
hear what he said. No, I'll no swaggerers.

FALSTAFF  He's no swaggerer, hostess, a tame cheater, i'
faith. You may stroke him as gently as a puppy
greyhound. He'll not swagger with a Barbary hen if
her feathers turn back in any show of resistance.--
Call him up, drawer.	[Drawer exits.]

HOSTESS  "Cheater" call you him? I will bar no honest
man my house, nor no cheater, but I do not love
swaggering. By my troth, I am the worse when one
says "swagger." Feel, masters, how I shake; look
you, I warrant you.

DOLL  So you do, hostess.

HOSTESS  Do I? Yea, in very truth, do I, an 'twere an
aspen leaf. I cannot abide swaggerers.

[Enter Ancient Pistol, Bardolph, and Page.]


PISTOL  God save you, Sir John.

FALSTAFF  Welcome, Ancient Pistol. Here, Pistol, I
charge you with a cup of sack. Do you discharge
upon mine hostess.

PISTOL  I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two
bullets.

FALSTAFF  She is pistol-proof. Sir, you shall not hardly
offend her.

HOSTESS  Come, I'll drink no proofs nor no bullets. I'll
drink no more than will do me good, for no man's
pleasure, I.

PISTOL  Then, to you, Mistress Dorothy! I will charge
you.

DOLL  Charge me? I scorn you, scurvy companion.
What, you poor, base, rascally, cheating lack-linen
mate! Away, you mouldy rogue, away! I am meat for
your master.

PISTOL  I know you, Mistress Dorothy.

DOLL  Away, you cutpurse rascal, you filthy bung, away!
By this wine, I'll thrust my knife in your mouldy
chaps an you play the saucy cuttle with me. Away,
you bottle-ale rascal, you basket-hilt stale juggler,
you. Since when, I pray you, sir? God's light, with
two points on your shoulder? Much!

PISTOL  God let me not live but I will murder your ruff
for this.

FALSTAFF  No more, Pistol. I would not have you go off
here. Discharge yourself of our company, Pistol.

HOSTESS  No, good Captain Pistol, not here, sweet
captain!

DOLL  Captain? Thou abominable damned cheater, art
thou not ashamed to be called captain? An captains
were of my mind, they would truncheon you out for
taking their names upon you before you have
earned them. You a captain? You slave, for what?
For tearing a poor whore's ruff in a bawdy house?
He a captain! Hang him, rogue. He lives upon
mouldy stewed prunes and dried cakes. A captain?
God's light, these villains will make the word as
odious as the word "occupy," which was an excellent
good word before it was ill sorted. Therefore
captains had need look to 't.

BARDOLPH, [to Pistol]  Pray thee go down, good ancient.

FALSTAFF  Hark thee hither, Mistress Doll.

PISTOL, [to Bardolph]  Not I. I tell thee what, Corporal
Bardolph, I could tear her. I'll be revenged of her.

PAGE  Pray thee go down.

PISTOL  I'll see her damned first to Pluto's damned
lake, by this hand, to th' infernal deep with Erebus
and tortures vile also. Hold hook and line, say I.
Down, down, dogs! Down, Fates! Have we not
Hiren here?	[He draws his sword.]

HOSTESS  Good Captain Peesell, be quiet. 'Tis very late,
i' faith. I beseek you now, aggravate your choler.

PISTOL  These be good humors indeed. Shall pack-horses
and hollow pampered jades of Asia, which
cannot go but thirty mile a day, compare with
Caesars and with cannibals and Troyant Greeks?
Nay, rather damn them with King Cerberus, and let
the welkin roar. Shall we fall foul for toys?

HOSTESS  By my troth, captain, these are very bitter
words.

BARDOLPH  Begone, good ancient. This will grow to a
brawl anon.

PISTOL  Die men like dogs! Give crowns like pins! Have
we not Hiren here?

HOSTESS  O' my word, captain, there's none such here.
What the good-year, do you think I would deny her?
For God's sake, be quiet.

PISTOL  Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis. Come,
give 's some sack. Si fortune me tormente, sperato
me contento. Fear we broadsides? No, let the fiend
give fire. Give me some sack, and, sweetheart, lie
thou there. [Laying down his sword.] Come we to
full points here? And are etceteras nothings?

FALSTAFF  Pistol, I would be quiet.

PISTOL  Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf. What, we have
seen the seven stars.

DOLL  For God's sake, thrust him downstairs. I cannot
endure such a fustian rascal.

PISTOL  "Thrust him downstairs"? Know we not Galloway
nags?

FALSTAFF  Quoit him down, Bardolph, like a shove-groat
shilling. Nay, an he do nothing but speak
nothing, he shall be nothing here.

BARDOLPH  Come, get you downstairs.

PISTOL, [taking up his sword]  What, shall we have
incision? Shall we imbrue? Then death rock me
asleep, abridge my doleful days. Why then, let
grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds untwind the Sisters
Three. Come, Atropos, I say.

HOSTESS  Here's goodly stuff toward!

FALSTAFF  Give me my rapier, boy.

DOLL  I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee do not draw.

FALSTAFF, [to Pistol]  Get you downstairs.	[They fight.]

HOSTESS  Here's a goodly tumult. I'll forswear keeping
house afore I'll be in these tirrits and frights. So,
murder, I warrant now. Alas, alas, put up your
naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.
[Bardolph and Pistol exit.]

DOLL  I pray thee, Jack, be quiet. The rascal's gone. Ah,
you whoreson little valiant villain, you.

HOSTESS, [to Falstaff]  Are you not hurt i' th' groin?
Methought he made a shrewd thrust at your belly.

[Enter Bardolph.]


FALSTAFF  Have you turned him out o' doors?

BARDOLPH  Yea, sir. The rascal's drunk. You have hurt
him, sir, i' th' shoulder.

FALSTAFF  A rascal to brave me!

DOLL  Ah, you sweet little rogue, you. Alas, poor ape,
how thou sweat'st! Come, let me wipe thy face.
Come on, you whoreson chops. Ah, rogue, i' faith, I
love thee. Thou art as valorous as Hector of Troy,
worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better
than the Nine Worthies. Ah, villain!

FALSTAFF  Ah, rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a
blanket.

DOLL  Do, an thou darest for thy heart. An thou dost, I'll
canvass thee between a pair of sheets.

[Enter Musicians and Francis.]


PAGE  The music is come, sir.

FALSTAFF  Let them play.--Play, sirs.--Sit on my knee,
Doll. A rascal bragging slave! The rogue fled from
me like quicksilver.

DOLL  I' faith, and thou followed'st him like a church.
Thou whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig,
when wilt thou leave fighting a-days and foining a-nights
and begin to patch up thine old body for
heaven?

[Enter behind them Prince and Poins disguised.]


FALSTAFF  Peace, good Doll. Do not speak like a death's-head;
do not bid me remember mine end.

DOLL  Sirrah, what humor's the Prince of?

FALSTAFF  A good shallow young fellow, he would have
made a good pantler; he would 'a chipped bread
well.

DOLL  They say Poins has a good wit.

FALSTAFF  He a good wit? Hang him, baboon. His wit's
as thick as Tewkesbury mustard. There's no more
conceit in him than is in a mallet.

DOLL  Why does the Prince love him so then?

FALSTAFF  Because their legs are both of a bigness, and
he plays at quoits well, and eats conger and fennel,
and drinks off candles' ends for flap-dragons, and
rides the wild mare with the boys, and jumps upon
joint stools, and swears with a good grace, and
wears his boots very smooth like unto the sign of
the Leg, and breeds no bate with telling of discreet
stories, and such other gambol faculties he has that
show a weak mind and an able body, for the which
the Prince admits him; for the Prince himself is
such another. The weight of a hair will turn the
scales between their avoirdupois.

PRINCE, [aside to Poins]  Would not this nave of a wheel
have his ears cut off?

POINS  Let's beat him before his whore.

PRINCE  Look whe'er the withered elder hath not his
poll clawed like a parrot.

POINS  Is it not strange that desire should so many years
outlive performance?

FALSTAFF  Kiss me, Doll.

PRINCE, [aside to Poins]  Saturn and Venus this year in
conjunction! What says th' almanac to that?

POINS  And look whether the fiery trigon, his man, be
not lisping to his master's old tables, his notebook,
his counsel keeper.

FALSTAFF, [to Doll]  Thou dost give me flattering busses.

DOLL  By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant
heart.

FALSTAFF  I am old, I am old.

DOLL  I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young
boy of them all.

FALSTAFF  What stuff wilt thou have a kirtle of? I shall
receive money o' Thursday; thou shalt have a cap
tomorrow. A merry song! Come, it grows late. We'll
to bed. Thou 'lt forget me when I am gone.

DOLL  By my troth, thou 'lt set me a-weeping an thou
sayst so. Prove that ever I dress myself handsome till
thy return. Well, harken a' th' end.

FALSTAFF  Some sack, Francis.

PRINCE, POINS, [coming forward]  Anon, anon, sir.

FALSTAFF  Ha? A bastard son of the King's?--And art
not thou Poins his brother?

PRINCE  Why, thou globe of sinful continents, what a
life dost thou lead?

FALSTAFF  A better than thou. I am a gentleman. Thou
art a drawer.

PRINCE  Very true, sir, and I come to draw you out by
the ears.

HOSTESS  O, the Lord preserve thy good Grace! By my
troth, welcome to London. Now the Lord bless that
sweet face of thine. O Jesu, are you come from
Wales?

FALSTAFF, [to Prince]  Thou whoreson mad compound
of majesty, by this light flesh and corrupt blood,
thou art welcome.

DOLL  How? You fat fool, I scorn you.

POINS  My lord, he will drive you out of your revenge
and turn all to a merriment if you take not the heat.

PRINCE, [to Falstaff]  You whoreson candle-mine, you,
how vilely did you speak of me even now before
this honest, virtuous, civil gentlewoman!

HOSTESS  God's blessing of your good heart, and so she
is, by my troth.

FALSTAFF, [to Prince]  Didst thou hear me?

PRINCE  Yea, and you knew me as you did when you ran
away by Gad's Hill. You knew I was at your back,
and spoke it on purpose to try my patience.

FALSTAFF  No, no, no, not so. I did not think thou wast
within hearing.

PRINCE  I shall drive you, then, to confess the wilfull
abuse, and then I know how to handle you.

FALSTAFF  No abuse, Hal, o' mine honor, no abuse.

PRINCE  Not to dispraise me and call me pantler and
bread-chipper and I know not what?

FALSTAFF  No abuse, Hal.

POINS  No abuse?

FALSTAFF  No abuse, Ned, i' th' world, honest Ned,
none. I dispraised him before the wicked, [(to
Prince)] that the wicked might not fall in love with
thee; in which doing, I have done the part of a
careful friend and a true subject, and thy father is to
give me thanks for it. No abuse, Hal.--None, Ned,
none. No, faith, boys, none.

PRINCE  See now whether pure fear and entire cowardice
doth not make thee wrong this virtuous gentlewoman
to close with us. Is she of the wicked, is
thine hostess here of the wicked, or is thy boy of the
wicked, or honest Bardolph, whose zeal burns in
his nose, of the wicked?

POINS  Answer, thou dead elm, answer.

FALSTAFF  The fiend hath pricked down Bardolph irrecoverable,
and his face is Lucifer's privy kitchen,
where he doth nothing but roast malt-worms. For
the boy, there is a good angel about him, but the
devil blinds him too.

PRINCE  For the women?

FALSTAFF  For one of them, she's in hell already and
burns poor souls. For th' other, I owe her money,
and whether she be damned for that I know not.

HOSTESS  No, I warrant you.

FALSTAFF  No, I think thou art not. I think thou art quit
for that. Marry, there is another indictment upon
thee for suffering flesh to be eaten in thy house
contrary to the law, for the which I think thou wilt
howl.

HOSTESS  All vitlars do so. What's a joint of mutton or
two in a whole Lent?

PRINCE, [to Doll]  You, gentlewoman.

DOLL  What says your Grace?

FALSTAFF  His grace says that which his flesh rebels
against.
[Peto knocks at door.]

HOSTESS  Who knocks so loud at door? Look to th' door
there, Francis.	[Francis exits.]

[Enter Peto.]


PRINCE  Peto, how now, what news?

PETO
The King your father is at Westminster,
And there are twenty weak and wearied posts
Come from the north, and as I came along
I met and overtook a dozen captains,
Bareheaded, sweating, knocking at the taverns
And asking everyone for Sir John Falstaff.

PRINCE
By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame
So idly to profane the precious time
When tempest of commotion, like the south
Borne with black vapor, doth begin to melt
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads.--
Give me my sword and cloak.--Falstaff, good
night.	[Prince, Peto, and Poins exit.]

FALSTAFF  Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the
night, and we must hence and leave it unpicked.

[(Knocking. Bardolph exits.)] More knocking at the
door? [(Bardolph returns.)] How now, what's the
matter?

BARDOLPH
You must away to court, sir, presently.
A dozen captains stay at door for you.

FALSTAFF, [to Page]  Pay the musicians, sirrah.--
Farewell, hostess.--Farewell, Doll. You see, my
good wenches, how men of merit are sought after.
The undeserver may sleep when the man of action
is called on. Farewell, good wenches. If I be not sent
away post, I will see you again ere I go.

DOLL  I cannot speak. If my heart be not ready to
burst--well, sweet Jack, have a care of thyself.

FALSTAFF  Farewell, farewell.
[He exits with Bardolph, Page, and Musicians.]

HOSTESS  Well, fare thee well. I have known thee these
twenty-nine years, come peasecod time, but an
honester and truer-hearted man--well, fare thee
well.

BARDOLPH, [within]  Mistress Tearsheet!

HOSTESS  What's the matter?

BARDOLPH, [within]  Bid Mistress Tearsheet come to my
master.

HOSTESS  O, run, Doll, run, run, good Doll. Come.--
She comes blubbered.--Yea! Will you come, Doll?
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the King in his nightgown with a Page.]


KING
Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick;
But, ere they come, bid them o'erread these letters
And well consider of them. Make good speed.
[Page exits.]
How many thousand of my poorest subjects
Are at this hour asleep! O sleep, O gentle sleep,
Nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down
And steep my senses in forgetfulness?
Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,
Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber,
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great,
Under the canopies of costly state,
And lulled with sound of sweetest melody?
O thou dull god, why liest thou with the vile
In loathsome beds and leavest the kingly couch
A watch-case or a common 'larum bell?
Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast
Seal up the shipboy's eyes and rock his brains
In cradle of the rude imperious surge
And in the visitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads and hanging them
With deafing clamor in the slippery clouds
That with the hurly death itself awakes?
Canst thou, O partial sleep, give thy repose
To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude,
And, in the calmest and most stillest night,
With all appliances and means to boot,
Deny it to a king? Then, happy low, lie down.
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.

[Enter Warwick, Surrey and Sir John Blunt.]


WARWICK
Many good morrows to your Majesty.

KING  Is it good morrow, lords?

WARWICK  'Tis one o'clock, and past.

KING
Why then, good morrow to you all, my lords.
Have you read o'er the letter that I sent you?

WARWICK  We have, my liege.

KING
Then you perceive the body of our kingdom
How foul it is, what rank diseases grow,
And with what danger near the heart of it.

WARWICK
It is but as a body yet distempered,
Which to his former strength may be restored
With good advice and little medicine.
My Lord Northumberland will soon be cooled.

KING
O God, that one might read the book of fate
And see the revolution of the times
Make mountains level, and the continent,
Weary of solid firmness, melt itself
Into the sea, and other times to see
The beachy girdle of the ocean
Too wide for Neptune's hips; how chance's mocks
And changes fill the cup of alteration
With divers liquors! O, if this were seen,
The happiest youth, viewing his progress through,
What perils past, what crosses to ensue,
Would shut the book and sit him down and die.
'Tis not ten years gone
Since Richard and Northumberland, great friends,
Did feast together, and in two years after
Were they at wars. It is but eight years since
This Percy was the man nearest my soul,
Who like a brother toiled in my affairs
And laid his love and life under my foot,
Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard
Gave him defiance. But which of you was by--
[To Warwick.] You, cousin Nevil, as I may
remember--
When Richard, with his eye brimful of tears,
Then checked and rated by Northumberland,
Did speak these words, now proved a prophecy?
"Northumberland, thou ladder by the which
My cousin Bolingbroke ascends my throne"--
Though then, God knows, I had no such intent,
But that necessity so bowed the state
That I and greatness were compelled to kiss--
"The time shall come," thus did he follow it,
"The time will come that foul sin, gathering head,
Shall break into corruption"--so went on,
Foretelling this same time's condition
And the division of our amity.

WARWICK
There is a history in all men's lives
Figuring the natures of the times deceased,
The which observed, a man may prophesy,
With a near aim, of the main chance of things
As yet not come to life, who in their seeds
And weak beginning lie intreasured.
Such things become the hatch and brood of time,
And by the necessary form of this,
King Richard might create a perfect guess
That great Northumberland, then false to him,
Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness,
Which should not find a ground to root upon
Unless on you.

KING  Are these things then necessities?
Then let us meet them like necessities.
And that same word even now cries out on us.
They say the Bishop and Northumberland
Are fifty thousand strong.

WARWICK  It cannot be, my lord.
Rumor doth double, like the voice and echo,
The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace
To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord,
The powers that you already have sent forth
Shall bring this prize in very easily.
To comfort you the more, I have received
A certain instance that Glendower is dead.
Your Majesty hath been this fortnight ill,
And these unseasoned hours perforce must add
Unto your sickness.

KING  I will take your counsel.
And were these inward wars once out of hand,
We would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Justice Shallow and Justice Silence.]


SHALLOW  Come on, come on, come on. Give me your
hand, sir, give me your hand, sir. An early stirrer, by
the rood. And how doth my good cousin Silence?

SILENCE  Good morrow, good cousin Shallow.

SHALLOW  And how doth my cousin your bedfellow?
And your fairest daughter and mine, my goddaughter
Ellen?

SILENCE  Alas, a black ousel, cousin Shallow.

SHALLOW  By yea and no, sir. I dare say my cousin
William is become a good scholar. He is at Oxford
still, is he not?

SILENCE  Indeed, sir, to my cost.

SHALLOW  He must then to the Inns o' Court shortly. I
was once of Clement's Inn, where I think they will
talk of mad Shallow yet.

SILENCE  You were called "Lusty Shallow" then,
cousin.

SHALLOW  By the Mass, I was called anything, and I
would have done anything indeed too, and roundly
too. There was I, and little John Doit of Staffordshire,
and black George Barnes, and Francis Pickbone,
and Will Squele, a Cotswold man. You had
not four such swinge-bucklers in all the Inns o'
Court again. And I may say to you, we knew where
the bona robas were and had the best of them all at
commandment. Then was Jack Falstaff, now Sir
John, a boy, and page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of
Norfolk.

SILENCE  This Sir John, cousin, that comes hither anon
about soldiers?

SHALLOW  The same Sir John, the very same. I see him
break Scoggin's head at the court gate, when he
was a crack not thus high; and the very same day did
I fight with one Sampson Stockfish, a fruiterer,
behind Grey's Inn. Jesu, Jesu, the mad days that I
have spent! And to see how many of my old acquaintance
are dead.

SILENCE  We shall all follow, cousin.

SHALLOW  Certain, 'tis certain, very sure, very sure.
Death, as the Psalmist saith, is certain to all. All
shall die. How a good yoke of bullocks at Stamford
Fair?

SILENCE  By my troth, cousin, I was not there.

SHALLOW  Death is certain. Is old Dooble of your town
living yet?

SILENCE  Dead, sir.

SHALLOW  Jesu, Jesu, dead! He drew a good bow, and
dead? He shot a fine shoot. John o' Gaunt loved him
well, and betted much money on his head. Dead! He
would have clapped i' th' clout at twelve score, and
carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen
and a half, that it would have done a man's
heart good to see. How a score of ewes now?

SILENCE  Thereafter as they be, a score of good ewes
may be worth ten pounds.

SHALLOW  And is old Dooble dead?

SILENCE  Here come two of Sir John Falstaff's men, as I
think.

[Enter Bardolph and one with him.]


SHALLOW  Good morrow, honest gentlemen.

BARDOLPH  I beseech you, which is Justice Shallow?

SHALLOW  I am Robert Shallow, sir, a poor esquire of
this county and one of the King's justices of the
peace. What is your good pleasure with me?

BARDOLPH  My captain, sir, commends him to you, my
captain, Sir John Falstaff, a tall gentleman, by
heaven, and a most gallant leader.

SHALLOW  He greets me well, sir. I knew him a good
backsword man. How doth the good knight? May I
ask how my lady his wife doth?

BARDOLPH  Sir, pardon. A soldier is better accommodated
than with a wife.

SHALLOW  It is well said, in faith, sir, and it is well said
indeed too. "Better accommodated." It is good,
yea, indeed is it. Good phrases are surely, and ever
were, very commendable. "Accommodated." It
comes of accommodo. Very good, a good phrase.

BARDOLPH  Pardon, sir, I have heard the word--
"phrase" call you it? By this day, I know not the
phrase, but I will maintain the word with my sword
to be a soldierlike word, and a word of exceeding
good command, by heaven. "Accommodated," that
is when a man is, as they say, accommodated, or
when a man is being whereby he may be thought to
be accommodated, which is an excellent thing.

[Enter Falstaff.]


SHALLOW  It is very just. Look, here comes good Sir
John.--Give me your good hand, give me your
Worship's good hand. By my troth, you like well and
bear your years very well. Welcome, good Sir John.

FALSTAFF  I am glad to see you well, good Master
Robert Shallow.--Master Sure-card, as I think?

SHALLOW  No, Sir John. It is my cousin Silence, in
commission with me.

FALSTAFF  Good Master Silence, it well befits you
should be of the peace.

SILENCE  Your good Worship is welcome.

FALSTAFF  Fie, this is hot weather, gentlemen. Have you
provided me here half a dozen sufficient men?

SHALLOW  Marry, have we, sir. Will you sit?
[They sit at a table.]

FALSTAFF  Let me see them, I beseech you.

SHALLOW  Where's the roll? Where's the roll? Where's
the roll? Let me see, let me see, let me see. So, so,
so, so, so. So, so. Yea, marry, sir.--Rafe Mouldy!--
Let them appear as I call, let them do so, let them
do so.

[Enter Mouldy, followed by Shadow, Wart, Feeble,
and Bullcalf.]

Let me see, where is Mouldy?

MOULDY, [coming forward]  Here, an it please you.

SHALLOW  What think you, Sir John? A good-limbed
fellow, young, strong, and of good friends.

FALSTAFF  Is thy name Mouldy?

MOULDY  Yea, an 't please you.

FALSTAFF  'Tis the more time thou wert used.

SHALLOW  Ha, ha, ha, most excellent, i' faith! Things
that are mouldy lack use. Very singular good, in
faith. Well said, Sir John, very well said.

FALSTAFF  Prick him.
[Shallow marks the scroll.]

MOULDY  I was pricked well enough before, an you
could have let me alone. My old dame will be
undone now for one to do her husbandry and her
drudgery. You need not to have pricked me. There
are other men fitter to go out than I.

FALSTAFF  Go to. Peace, Mouldy. You shall go. Mouldy,
it is time you were spent.

MOULDY  Spent?

SHALLOW  Peace, fellow, peace. Stand aside. Know you
where you are?--For th' other, Sir John. Let me
see.--Simon Shadow!

FALSTAFF  Yea, marry, let me have him to sit under.
He's like to be a cold soldier.

SHALLOW  Where's Shadow?

SHADOW, [coming forward]  Here, sir.

FALSTAFF  Shadow, whose son art thou?

SHADOW  My mother's son, sir.

FALSTAFF  Thy mother's son! Like enough, and thy
father's shadow. So the son of the female is the
shadow of the male. It is often so, indeed, but much
of the father's substance.

SHALLOW  Do you like him, Sir John?

FALSTAFF  Shadow will serve for summer. Prick him,
for we have a number of shadows to fill up the
muster book.

SHALLOW  Thomas Wart!

FALSTAFF  Where's he?

WART, [coming forward]  Here, sir.

FALSTAFF  Is thy name Wart?

WART  Yea, sir.

FALSTAFF  Thou art a very ragged wart.

SHALLOW  Shall I prick him down, Sir John?

FALSTAFF  It were superfluous, for his apparel is built
upon his back, and the whole frame stands upon
pins. Prick him no more.

SHALLOW  Ha, ha, ha. You can do it, sir, you can do it. I
commend you well.--Francis Feeble!

FEEBLE, [coming forward]  Here, sir.

SHALLOW  What trade art thou, Feeble?

FEEBLE  A woman's tailor, sir.

SHALLOW  Shall I prick him, sir?

FALSTAFF  You may, but if he had been a man's tailor,
he'd ha' pricked you.--Wilt thou make as many
holes in an enemy's battle as thou hast done in a
woman's petticoat?

FEEBLE  I will do my good will, sir. You can have no
more.

FALSTAFF  Well said, good woman's tailor, well said,
courageous Feeble. Thou wilt be as valiant as the
wrathful dove or most magnanimous mouse.--
Prick the woman's tailor well, Master Shallow,
deep, Master Shallow.

FEEBLE  I would Wart might have gone, sir.

FALSTAFF  I would thou wert a man's tailor, that thou
mightst mend him and make him fit to go. I cannot
put him to a private soldier that is the leader of so
many thousands. Let that suffice, most forcible
Feeble.

FEEBLE  It shall suffice, sir.

FALSTAFF  I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble.--Who
is the next?

SHALLOW  Peter Bullcalf o' th' green.

FALSTAFF  Yea, marry, let's see Bullcalf.

BULLCALF, [coming forward]  Here, sir.

FALSTAFF  Fore God, a likely fellow. Come, prick me
Bullcalf till he roar again.

BULLCALF  O Lord, good my lord captain--

FALSTAFF  What, dost thou roar before thou art
pricked?

BULLCALF  O Lord, sir, I am a diseased man.

FALSTAFF  What disease hast thou?

BULLCALF  A whoreson cold, sir, a cough, sir, which I
caught with ringing in the King's affairs upon his
coronation day, sir.

FALSTAFF  Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown.
We will have away thy cold, and I will take such
order that thy friends shall ring for thee.--Is here
all?

SHALLOW  Here is two more called than your number.
You must have but four here, sir, and so I pray you
go in with me to dinner.

FALSTAFF  Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot
tarry dinner. I am glad to see you, by my troth,
Master Shallow.

SHALLOW  O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay
all night in the windmill in Saint George's Field?

FALSTAFF  No more of that, good Master Shallow, no
more of that.

SHALLOW  Ha, 'twas a merry night. And is Jane Nightwork
alive?

FALSTAFF  She lives, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW  She never could away with me.

FALSTAFF  Never, never. She would always say she could
not abide Master Shallow.

SHALLOW  By the Mass, I could anger her to th' heart.
She was then a bona roba. Doth she hold her own
well?

FALSTAFF  Old, old, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW  Nay, she must be old. She cannot choose but
be old. Certain, she's old, and had Robin Nightwork
by old Nightwork before I came to Clement's Inn.

SILENCE  That's fifty-five year ago.

SHALLOW  Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that
that this knight and I have seen!--Ha, Sir John, said
I well?

FALSTAFF  We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master
Shallow.

SHALLOW  That we have, that we have, that we have. In
faith, Sir John, we have. Our watchword was "Hem,
boys." Come, let's to dinner, come, let's to dinner.
Jesus, the days that we have seen! Come, come.
[Shallow, Silence, and Falstaff rise and exit.]

BULLCALF  Good Master Corporate Bardolph, stand my
friend, and here's four Harry ten-shillings in
French crowns for you. [He gives Bardolph money.]
In very truth, sir, I had as lief be hanged, sir, as go.
And yet, for mine own part, sir, I do not care, but
rather because I am unwilling, and, for mine own
part, have a desire to stay with my friends. Else, sir,
I did not care, for mine own part, so much.

BARDOLPH  Go to. Stand aside.

MOULDY  And, good Master Corporal Captain, for my
old dame's sake, stand my friend. She has nobody to
do anything about her when I am gone, and she is
old and cannot help herself. You shall have forty,
sir.	[He gives money.]

BARDOLPH  Go to. Stand aside.

FEEBLE  By my troth, I care not. A man can die but
once. We owe God a death. I'll ne'er bear a base
mind. An 't be my destiny, so; an 't be not, so. No
man's too good to serve 's prince, and let it go
which way it will, he that dies this year is quit for
the next.

BARDOLPH  Well said. Th' art a good fellow.

FEEBLE  Faith, I'll bear no base mind.

[Enter Falstaff and the Justices.]


FALSTAFF  Come, sir, which men shall I have?

SHALLOW  Four of which you please.

BARDOLPH, [aside to Falstaff]  Sir, a word with you. I
have three pound to free Mouldy and Bullcalf.

FALSTAFF  Go to, well.

SHALLOW  Come, Sir John, which four will you have?

FALSTAFF  Do you choose for me.

SHALLOW  Marry, then, Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, and
Shadow.

FALSTAFF  Mouldy and Bullcalf! For you, Mouldy, stay
at home till you are past service.--And for your
part, Bullcalf, grow till you come unto it. I will
none of you.	[Mouldy and Bullcalf exit.]

SHALLOW  Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong.
They are your likeliest men, and I would have you
served with the best.

FALSTAFF  Will you tell me, Master Shallow, how to
choose a man? Care I for the limb, the thews, the
stature, bulk and big assemblance of a man? Give
me the spirit, Master Shallow. Here's Wart. You see
what a ragged appearance it is. He shall charge you
and discharge you with the motion of a pewterer's
hammer, come off and on swifter than he that
gibbets on the brewer's bucket. And this same half-faced
fellow, Shadow, give me this man. He presents
no mark to the enemy. The foeman may with
as great aim level at the edge of a penknife. And for
a retreat, how swiftly will this Feeble, the woman's
tailor, run off! O, give me the spare men, and spare
me the great ones.--Put me a caliver into Wart's
hand, Bardolph.

BARDOLPH, [giving Wart a musket]  Hold, Wart. Traverse.
Thas, thas, thas.

FALSTAFF, [to Wart]  Come, manage me your caliver: so,
very well, go to, very good, exceeding good. O, give
me always a little, lean, old, chopped, bald shot.
Well said, i' faith, Wart. Th' art a good scab. Hold,
there's a tester for thee.	[He gives Wart money.]

SHALLOW  He is not his craft's master. He doth not do it
right. I remember at Mile End Green, when I lay at
Clement's Inn--I was then Sir Dagonet in Arthur's
show--there was a little quiver fellow, and he
would manage you his piece thus. [Shallow performs
with the musket.] And he would about and
about, and come you in, and come you in. "Rah,
tah, tah," would he say. "Bounce," would he say,
and away again would he go, and again would he
come. I shall ne'er see such a fellow.

FALSTAFF  These fellows will do well, Master Shallow.
--God keep you, Master Silence. I will not use
many words with you. Fare you well, gentlemen
both. I thank you. I must a dozen mile tonight.--
Bardolph, give the soldiers coats.

SHALLOW  Sir John, the Lord bless you. God prosper
your affairs. God send us peace. At your return, visit
our house. Let our old acquaintance be renewed.
Peradventure I will with you to the court.

FALSTAFF  Fore God, would you would, Master
Shallow.

SHALLOW  Go to. I have spoke at a word. God keep you.

FALSTAFF  Fare you well, gentle gentlemen.
[Shallow and Silence exit.]
On, Bardolph. Lead the men away.
[All but Falstaff exit.]
As I return, I will fetch off these justices. I do see
the bottom of Justice Shallow. Lord, Lord, how
subject we old men are to this vice of lying. This
same starved justice hath done nothing but prate to
me of the wildness of his youth and the feats he hath
done about Turnbull Street, and every third word a
lie, duer paid to the hearer than the Turk's tribute. I
do remember him at Clement's Inn, like a man
made after supper of a cheese paring. When he was
naked, he was, for all the world, like a forked radish
with a head fantastically carved upon it with a
knife. He was so forlorn that his dimensions to
any thick sight were invincible. He was the very
genius of famine, yet lecherous as a monkey,
and the whores called him "mandrake." He came
ever in the rearward of the fashion, and sung
those tunes to the overscutched huswives that he
heard the carmen whistle, and swore they were his
fancies or his good-nights. And now is this Vice's
dagger become a squire, and talks as familiarly
of John o' Gaunt as if he had been sworn brother
to him, and I'll be sworn he ne'er saw him but
once in the tilt-yard, and then he burst his head
for crowding among the Marshal's men. I saw it
and told John o' Gaunt he beat his own name, for
you might have thrust him and all his apparel into
an eel-skin; the case of a treble hautboy was a
mansion for him, a court. And now has he land and
beefs. Well, I'll be acquainted with him if I return,
and 't shall go hard but I'll make him a philosopher's
two stones to me. If the young dace be a
bait for the old pike, I see no reason in the law of
nature but I may snap at him. Let time shape, and
there an end.
[He exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the Archbishop of York, Mowbray, Lord
Bardolph, Hastings, and their officers within the Forest
of Gaultree.]


ARCHBISHOP  What is this forest called?

HASTINGS
'Tis Gaultree Forest, an 't shall please your Grace.

ARCHBISHOP
Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth
To know the numbers of our enemies.

HASTINGS
We have sent forth already.

ARCHBISHOP  'Tis well done.
My friends and brethren in these great affairs,
I must acquaint you that I have received
New-dated letters from Northumberland,
Their cold intent, tenor, and substance, thus:
Here doth he wish his person, with such powers
As might hold sortance with his quality,
The which he could not levy; whereupon
He is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes,
To Scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers
That your attempts may overlive the hazard
And fearful meeting of their opposite.

MOWBRAY
Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground
And dash themselves to pieces.

[Enter Messenger.]


HASTINGS  Now, what news?

MESSENGER
West of this forest, scarcely off a mile,
In goodly form comes on the enemy,
And, by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.

MOWBRAY
The just proportion that we gave them out.
Let us sway on and face them in the field.

[Enter Westmoreland.]


ARCHBISHOP
What well-appointed leader fronts us here?

MOWBRAY
I think it is my Lord of Westmoreland.

WESTMORELAND
Health and fair greeting from our general,
The Prince Lord John and Duke of Lancaster.

ARCHBISHOP
Say on, my Lord of Westmoreland, in peace,
What doth concern your coming.

WESTMORELAND  Then, my lord,
Unto your Grace do I in chief address
The substance of my speech. If that rebellion
Came like itself, in base and abject routs,
Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rage,
And countenanced by boys and beggary--
I say, if damned commotion so appeared
In his true, native, and most proper shape,
You, reverend father, and these noble lords
Had not been here to dress the ugly form
Of base and bloody insurrection
With your fair honors. You, Lord Archbishop,
Whose see is by a civil peace maintained,
Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touched,
Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutored,
Whose white investments figure innocence,
The dove and very blessed spirit of peace,
Wherefore do you so ill translate yourself
Out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace,
Into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war,
Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,
Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine
To a loud trumpet and a point of war?

ARCHBISHOP
Wherefore do I this? So the question stands.
Briefly, to this end: we are all diseased
And with our surfeiting and wanton hours
Have brought ourselves into a burning fever,
And we must bleed for it; of which disease
Our late King Richard, being infected, died.
But, my most noble Lord of Westmoreland,
I take not on me here as a physician,
Nor do I as an enemy to peace
Troop in the throngs of military men,
But rather show awhile like fearful war
To diet rank minds sick of happiness
And purge th' obstructions which begin to stop
Our very veins of life. Hear me more plainly.
I have in equal balance justly weighed
What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we
suffer,
And find our griefs heavier than our offenses.
We see which way the stream of time doth run
And are enforced from our most quiet there
By the rough torrent of occasion,
And have the summary of all our griefs,
When time shall serve, to show in articles;
Which long ere this we offered to the King
And might by no suit gain our audience.
When we are wronged and would unfold our griefs,
We are denied access unto his person
Even by those men that most have done us wrong.
The dangers of the days but newly gone,
Whose memory is written on the earth
With yet-appearing blood, and the examples
Of every minute's instance, present now,
Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms,
Not to break peace or any branch of it,
But to establish here a peace indeed,
Concurring both in name and quality.

WESTMORELAND
Whenever yet was your appeal denied?
Wherein have you been galled by the King?
What peer hath been suborned to grate on you,
That you should seal this lawless bloody book
Of forged rebellion with a seal divine
And consecrate commotion's bitter edge?

ARCHBISHOP
My brother general, the commonwealth,
To brother born an household cruelty,
I make my quarrel in particular.

WESTMORELAND
There is no need of any such redress,
Or if there were, it not belongs to you.

MOWBRAY
Why not to him in part, and to us all
That feel the bruises of the days before
And suffer the condition of these times
To lay a heavy and unequal hand
Upon our honors?

WESTMORELAND  O, my good Lord Mowbray,
Construe the times to their necessities,
And you shall say indeed it is the time,
And not the King, that doth you injuries.
Yet for your part, it not appears to me
Either from the King or in the present time
That you should have an inch of any ground
To build a grief on. Were you not restored
To all the Duke of Norfolk's seigniories,
Your noble and right well remembered father's?

MOWBRAY
What thing, in honor, had my father lost
That need to be revived and breathed in me?
The King that loved him, as the state stood then,
Was force perforce compelled to banish him,
And then that Henry Bolingbroke and he,
Being mounted and both roused in their seats,
Their neighing coursers daring of the spur,
Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,
Their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel,
And the loud trumpet blowing them together,
Then, then, when there was nothing could have
stayed
My father from the breast of Bolingbroke,
O, when the King did throw his warder down--
His own life hung upon the staff he threw--
Then threw he down himself and all their lives
That by indictment and by dint of sword
Have since miscarried under Bolingbroke.

WESTMORELAND
You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not what.
The Earl of Hereford was reputed then
In England the most valiant gentleman.
Who knows on whom fortune would then have
smiled?
But if your father had been victor there,
He ne'er had borne it out of Coventry;
For all the country in a general voice
Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and
love
Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on
And blessed and graced, indeed more than the
King.
But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our princely general
To know your griefs, to tell you from his Grace
That he will give you audience; and wherein
It shall appear that your demands are just,
You shall enjoy them, everything set off
That might so much as think you enemies.

MOWBRAY
But he hath forced us to compel this offer,
And it proceeds from policy, not love.

WESTMORELAND
Mowbray, you overween to take it so.
This offer comes from mercy, not from fear.
For, lo, within a ken our army lies,
Upon mine honor, all too confident
To give admittance to a thought of fear.
Our battle is more full of names than yours,
Our men more perfect in the use of arms,
Our armor all as strong, our cause the best.
Then reason will our hearts should be as good.
Say you not then our offer is compelled.

MOWBRAY
Well, by my will, we shall admit no parley.

WESTMORELAND
That argues but the shame of your offense.
A rotten case abides no handling.

HASTINGS
Hath the Prince John a full commission,
In very ample virtue of his father,
To hear and absolutely to determine
Of what conditions we shall stand upon?

WESTMORELAND
That is intended in the General's name.
I muse you make so slight a question.

ARCHBISHOP, [giving Westmoreland a paper]
Then take, my Lord of Westmoreland, this schedule,
For this contains our general grievances.
Each several article herein redressed,
All members of our cause, both here and hence
That are insinewed to this action,
Acquitted by a true substantial form
And present execution of our wills
To us and to our purposes confined,
We come within our awful banks again
And knit our powers to the arm of peace.

WESTMORELAND
This will I show the General. Please you, lords,
In sight of both our battles we may meet,
And either end in peace, which God so frame,
Or to the place of difference call the swords
Which must decide it.

ARCHBISHOP  My lord, we will do so.
[Westmoreland exits.]

MOWBRAY
There is a thing within my bosom tells me
That no conditions of our peace can stand.

HASTINGS
Fear you not that. If we can make our peace
Upon such large terms and so absolute
As our conditions shall consist upon,
Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.

MOWBRAY
Yea, but our valuation shall be such
That every slight and false-derived cause,
Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason,
Shall to the King taste of this action,
That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love,
We shall be winnowed with so rough a wind
That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff,
And good from bad find no partition.

ARCHBISHOP
No, no, my lord. Note this: the King is weary
Of dainty and such picking grievances,
For he hath found to end one doubt by death
Revives two greater in the heirs of life;
And therefore will he wipe his tables clean
And keep no telltale to his memory
That may repeat and history his loss
To new remembrance. For full well he knows
He cannot so precisely weed this land
As his misdoubts present occasion;
His foes are so enrooted with his friends
That, plucking to unfix an enemy,
He doth unfasten so and shake a friend;
So that this land, like an offensive wife
That hath enraged him on to offer strokes,
As he is striking holds his infant up
And hangs resolved correction in the arm
That was upreared to execution.

HASTINGS
Besides, the King hath wasted all his rods
On late offenders, that he now doth lack
The very instruments of chastisement,
So that his power, like to a fangless lion,
May offer but not hold.

ARCHBISHOP  'Tis very true,
And therefore be assured, my good Lord Marshal,
If we do now make our atonement well,
Our peace will, like a broken limb united,
Grow stronger for the breaking.

MOWBRAY  Be it so.
Here is returned my Lord of Westmoreland.

[Enter Westmoreland.]


WESTMORELAND, [to the Archbishop]
The Prince is here at hand. Pleaseth your Lordship
To meet his Grace just distance 'tween our armies.

[Enter Prince John and his army.]


MOWBRAY, [to the Archbishop]
Your Grace of York, in God's name then set
forward.

ARCHBISHOP
Before, and greet his Grace.--My lord, we come.
[All move forward.]

JOHN OF LANCASTER
You are well encountered here, my cousin
Mowbray.--
Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop,--
And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all.--
My Lord of York, it better showed with you
When that your flock, assembled by the bell,
Encircled you to hear with reverence
Your exposition on the holy text
Than now to see you here, an iron man talking,
Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum,
Turning the word to sword, and life to death.
That man that sits within a monarch's heart
And ripens in the sunshine of his favor,
Would he abuse the countenance of the King,
Alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach
In shadow of such greatness! With you, Lord
Bishop,
It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken
How deep you were within the books of God,
To us the speaker in His parliament,
To us th' imagined voice of God Himself,
The very opener and intelligencer
Between the grace, the sanctities, of heaven,
And our dull workings? O, who shall believe
But you misuse the reverence of your place,
Employ the countenance and grace of heaven
As a false favorite doth his prince's name,
In deeds dishonorable? You have ta'en up,
Under the counterfeited zeal of God,
The subjects of His substitute, my father,
And both against the peace of heaven and him
Have here up-swarmed them.

ARCHBISHOP  Good my Lord of
Lancaster,
I am not here against your father's peace,
But, as I told my Lord of Westmoreland,
The time misordered doth, in common sense,
Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form
To hold our safety up. I sent your Grace
The parcels and particulars of our grief,
The which hath been with scorn shoved from the
court,
Whereon this Hydra son of war is born,
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep
With grant of our most just and right desires,
And true obedience, of this madness cured,
Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.

MOWBRAY
If not, we ready are to try our fortunes
To the last man.

HASTINGS  And though we here fall down,
We have supplies to second our attempt;
If they miscarry, theirs shall second them,
And so success of mischief shall be born,
And heir from heir shall hold his quarrel up
Whiles England shall have generation.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
You are too shallow, Hastings, much too shallow
To sound the bottom of the after-times.

WESTMORELAND
Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly
How far forth you do like their articles.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
I like them all, and do allow them well,
And swear here by the honor of my blood
My father's purposes have been mistook,
And some about him have too lavishly
Wrested his meaning and authority.
[To the Archbishop.] My lord, these griefs shall be
with speed redressed;
Upon my soul, they shall. If this may please you,
Discharge your powers unto their several counties,
As we will ours, and here, between the armies,
Let's drink together friendly and embrace,
That all their eyes may bear those tokens home
Of our restored love and amity.

ARCHBISHOP
I take your princely word for these redresses.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
I give it you, and will maintain my word,
And thereupon I drink unto your Grace.
[The Leaders of both armies begin to drink together.]

HASTINGS, [to an Officer]
Go, captain, and deliver to the army
This news of peace. Let them have pay, and part.
I know it will well please them. Hie thee, captain.
[Officer exits.]

ARCHBISHOP, [toasting Westmoreland]
To you, my noble Lord of Westmoreland.

WESTMORELAND, [returning the toast]
I pledge your Grace, and if you knew what pains
I have bestowed to breed this present peace,
You would drink freely. But my love to you
Shall show itself more openly hereafter.

ARCHBISHOP
I do not doubt you.

WESTMORELAND  I am glad of it.--
Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.

MOWBRAY
You wish me health in very happy season,
For I am on the sudden something ill.

ARCHBISHOP
Against ill chances men are ever merry,
But heaviness foreruns the good event.

WESTMORELAND
Therefore be merry, coz, since sudden sorrow
Serves to say thus: "Some good thing comes
tomorrow."

ARCHBISHOP
Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.

MOWBRAY
So much the worse if your own rule be true.
[Shout within.]

JOHN OF LANCASTER
The word of peace is rendered. Hark how they
shout.

MOWBRAY
This had been cheerful after victory.

ARCHBISHOP
A peace is of the nature of a conquest,
For then both parties nobly are subdued,
And neither party loser.

JOHN OF LANCASTER, [to Westmoreland]  Go, my lord,
And let our army be discharged too.
[Westmoreland exits.]
[To the Archbishop.] And, good my lord, so please
you, let our trains
March by us, that we may peruse the men
We should have coped withal.

ARCHBISHOP  Go, good Lord
Hastings,
And ere they be dismissed, let them march by.
[Hastings exits.]

JOHN OF LANCASTER
I trust, lords, we shall lie tonight together.

[Enter Westmoreland.]

Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?

WESTMORELAND
The leaders, having charge from you to stand,
Will not go off until they hear you speak.

JOHN OF LANCASTER  They know their duties.

[Enter Hastings.]


HASTINGS, [to the Archbishop]
My lord, our army is dispersed already.
Like youthful steers unyoked, they take their
courses
East, west, north, south, or, like a school broke up,
Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.

WESTMORELAND
Good tidings, my Lord Hastings, for the which
I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason.--
And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray,
Of capital treason I attach you both.

MOWBRAY
Is this proceeding just and honorable?

WESTMORELAND  Is your assembly so?

ARCHBISHOP
Will you thus break your faith?

JOHN OF LANCASTER  I pawned thee none.
I promised you redress of these same grievances
Whereof you did complain, which, by mine honor,
I will perform with a most Christian care.
But for you rebels, look to taste the due
Meet for rebellion and such acts as yours.
Most shallowly did you these arms commence,
Fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence.--
Strike up our drums; pursue the scattered stray.
God, and not we, hath safely fought today.--
Some guard these traitors to the block of death,
Treason's true bed and yielder-up of breath.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Alarum. Excursions. Enter Falstaff and Colevile.]


FALSTAFF  What's your name, sir? Of what condition are
you, and of what place, I pray?

COLEVILE  I am a knight, sir, and my name is Colevile of
the Dale.

FALSTAFF  Well then, Colevile is your name, a knight is
your degree, and your place the Dale. Colevile shall
be still your name, a traitor your degree, and the
dungeon your place, a place deep enough so shall
you be still Colevile of the Dale.

COLEVILE  Are not you Sir John Falstaff?

FALSTAFF  As good a man as he, sir, whoe'er I am. Do
you yield, sir, or shall I sweat for you? If I do sweat,
they are the drops of thy lovers and they weep for
thy death. Therefore rouse up fear and trembling,
and do observance to my mercy.

COLEVILE  I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and in that
thought yield me.

FALSTAFF  I have a whole school of tongues in this belly
of mine, and not a tongue of them all speaks any
other word but my name. An I had but a belly of any
indifferency, I were simply the most active fellow in
Europe. My womb, my womb, my womb undoes
me. Here comes our general.

[Enter John, Westmoreland, and the rest.]


JOHN OF LANCASTER
The heat is past. Follow no further now.
Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.
[Westmoreland exits. Retreat is sounded.]
Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while?
When everything is ended, then you come.
These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life,
One time or other break some gallows' back.

FALSTAFF  I would be sorry, my lord, but it should be
thus. I never knew yet but rebuke and check was the
reward of valor. Do you think me a swallow, an
arrow, or a bullet? Have I in my poor and old
motion the expedition of thought? I have speeded
hither with the very extremest inch of possibility. I
have foundered ninescore and odd posts, and here,
travel-tainted as I am, have in my pure and immaculate
valor taken Sir John Colevile of the Dale, a most
furious knight and valorous enemy. But what of
that? He saw me and yielded, that I may justly say,
with the hook-nosed fellow of Rome, "There, cousin,
I came, saw, and overcame."

JOHN OF LANCASTER  It was more of his courtesy than
your deserving.

FALSTAFF  I know not. Here he is, and here I yield him.
And I beseech your Grace let it be booked with the
rest of this day's deeds, or, by the Lord, I will have it
in a particular ballad else, with mine own picture
on the top on 't, Colevile kissing my foot; to the
which course if I be enforced, if you do not all show
like gilt twopences to me, and I in the clear sky of
fame o'ershine you as much as the full moon doth
the cinders of the element (which show like pins'
heads to her), believe not the word of the noble.
Therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.

JOHN OF LANCASTER  Thine's too heavy to mount.

FALSTAFF  Let it shine, then.

JOHN OF LANCASTER  Thine's too thick to shine.

FALSTAFF  Let it do something, my good lord, that may
do me good, and call it what you will.

JOHN OF LANCASTER  Is thy name Colevile?

COLEVILE  It is, my lord.

JOHN OF LANCASTER  A famous rebel art thou,
Colevile.

FALSTAFF  And a famous true subject took him.

COLEVILE
I am, my lord, but as my betters are
That led me hither. Had they been ruled by me,
You should have won them dearer than you have.

FALSTAFF  I know not how they sold themselves, but
thou, like a kind fellow, gavest thyself away gratis,
and I thank thee for thee.

[Enter Westmoreland.]


JOHN OF LANCASTER  Now, have you left pursuit?

WESTMORELAND
Retreat is made and execution stayed.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
Send Colevile with his confederates
To York, to present execution.--
Blunt, lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.
[Blunt exits with Colevile.]
And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords.
I hear the King my father is sore sick.
Our news shall go before us to his Majesty,
[To Westmoreland.] Which, cousin, you shall bear
to comfort him,
And we with sober speed will follow you.

FALSTAFF  My lord, I beseech you give me leave to go
through Gloucestershire, and, when you come to
court, stand my good lord, pray, in your good
report.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
Fare you well, Falstaff. I, in my condition,
Shall better speak of you than you deserve.
[All but Falstaff exit.]

FALSTAFF  I would you had but the wit; 'twere better
than your dukedom. Good faith, this same young
sober-blooded boy doth not love me, nor a man
cannot make him laugh. But that's no marvel; he
drinks no wine. There's never none of these demure
boys come to any proof, for thin drink doth so
overcool their blood, and making many fish meals,
that they fall into a kind of male green-sickness, and
then, when they marry, they get wenches. They are
generally fools and cowards, which some of us
should be too, but for inflammation. A good sherris
sack hath a two-fold operation in it. It ascends me
into the brain, dries me there all the foolish and
dull and crudy vapors which environ it, makes it
apprehensive, quick, forgetive, full of nimble, fiery,
and delectable shapes, which, delivered o'er to the
voice, the tongue, which is the birth, becomes
excellent wit. The second property of your excellent
sherris is the warming of the blood, which,
before cold and settled, left the liver white and pale,
which is the badge of pusillanimity and cowardice.
But the sherris warms it and makes it course from
the inwards to the parts' extremes. It illumineth the
face, which as a beacon gives warning to all the rest
of this little kingdom, man, to arm; and then the
vital commoners and inland petty spirits muster me
all to their captain, the heart, who, great and puffed
up with this retinue, doth any deed of courage, and
this valor comes of sherris. So that skill in the
weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets it
a-work; and learning a mere hoard of gold kept
by a devil till sack commences it and sets it in
act and use. Hereof comes it that Prince Harry is
valiant, for the cold blood he did naturally inherit
of his father he hath, like lean, sterile, and bare
land, manured, husbanded, and tilled with excellent
endeavor of drinking good and good store
of fertile sherris, that he is become very hot and valiant.
If I had a thousand sons, the first human principle
I would teach them should be to forswear
thin potations and to addict themselves to sack.

[Enter Bardolph.]

How now, Bardolph?

BARDOLPH  The army is discharged all and gone.

FALSTAFF  Let them go. I'll through Gloucestershire,
and there will I visit Master Robert Shallow,
Esquire. I have him already temp'ring between my
finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal with
him. Come away.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter the King in a chair, Warwick, Thomas Duke of
Clarence, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, and
Attendants.]


KING
Now, lords, if God doth give successful end
To this debate that bleedeth at our doors,
We will our youth lead on to higher fields
And draw no swords but what are sanctified.
Our navy is addressed, our power collected,
Our substitutes in absence well invested,
And everything lies level to our wish.
Only we want a little personal strength;
And pause us till these rebels now afoot
Come underneath the yoke of government.

WARWICK
Both which we doubt not but your Majesty
Shall soon enjoy.

KING
Humphrey, my son of Gloucester, where is the
Prince your brother?

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER
I think he's gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.

KING
And how accompanied?

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER  I do not know, my lord.

KING
Is not his brother Thomas of Clarence with him?

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER
No, my good lord, he is in presence here.

THOMAS OF CLARENCE, [coming forward]  What would
my lord and father?

KING
Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.
How chance thou art not with the Prince thy
brother?
He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas.
Thou hast a better place in his affection
Than all thy brothers. Cherish it, my boy,
And noble offices thou mayst effect
Of mediation, after I am dead,
Between his greatness and thy other brethren.
Therefore omit him not, blunt not his love,
Nor lose the good advantage of his grace
By seeming cold or careless of his will.
For he is gracious if he be observed;
He hath a tear for pity, and a hand
Open as day for melting charity;
Yet notwithstanding, being incensed he is flint,
As humorous as winter, and as sudden
As flaws congealed in the spring of day.
His temper therefore must be well observed.
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
When you perceive his blood inclined to mirth;
But, being moody, give him time and scope
Till that his passions, like a whale on ground,
Confound themselves with working. Learn this,
Thomas,
And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,
That the united vessel of their blood,
Mingled with venom of suggestion
(As, force perforce, the age will pour it in),
Shall never leak, though it do work as strong
As aconitum or rash gunpowder.

THOMAS OF CLARENCE
I shall observe him with all care and love.

KING
Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas?

THOMAS OF CLARENCE
He is not there today; he dines in London.

KING
And how accompanied? Canst thou tell that?

THOMAS OF CLARENCE
With Poins and other his continual followers.

KING
Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds,
And he, the noble image of my youth,
Is overspread with them; therefore my grief
Stretches itself beyond the hour of death.
The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape,
In forms imaginary, th' unguided days
And rotten times that you shall look upon
When I am sleeping with my ancestors.
For when his headstrong riot hath no curb,
When rage and hot blood are his counsellors,
When means and lavish manners meet together,
O, with what wings shall his affections fly
Towards fronting peril and opposed decay!

WARWICK
My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite.
The Prince but studies his companions
Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the
language,
'Tis needful that the most immodest word
Be looked upon and learned; which, once attained,
Your Highness knows, comes to no further use
But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms,
The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,
Cast off his followers, and their memory
Shall as a pattern or a measure live,
By which his Grace must mete the lives of others,
Turning past evils to advantages.

KING
'Tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb
In the dead carrion.

[Enter Westmoreland.]

Who's here? Westmoreland?

WESTMORELAND
Health to my sovereign, and new happiness
Added to that that I am to deliver.
Prince John your son doth kiss your Grace's hand.
Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings, and all
Are brought to the correction of your law.
There is not now a rebel's sword unsheathed,
But peace puts forth her olive everywhere.
The manner how this action hath been borne
Here at more leisure may your Highness read
With every course in his particular.
[He gives the King a paper.]

KING
O Westmoreland, thou art a summer bird,
Which ever in the haunch of winter sings
The lifting up of day.

[Enter Harcourt.]

Look, here's more news.

HARCOURT
From enemies heavens keep your Majesty,
And when they stand against you, may they fall
As those that I am come to tell you of.
The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph,
With a great power of English and of Scots,
Are by the shrieve of Yorkshire overthrown.
The manner and true order of the fight
This packet, please it you, contains at large.
[He gives the King papers.]

KING
And wherefore should these good news make me
sick?
Will Fortune never come with both hands full,
But write her fair words still in foulest letters?
She either gives a stomach and no food--
Such are the poor, in health--or else a feast
And takes away the stomach--such are the rich,
That have abundance and enjoy it not.
I should rejoice now at this happy news,
And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy.
O, me! Come near me, now I am much ill.

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER
Comfort, your Majesty.

THOMAS OF CLARENCE  O, my royal father!

WESTMORELAND
My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.

WARWICK
Be patient, princes. You do know these fits
Are with his Highness very ordinary.
Stand from him, give him air. He'll straight be
well.

THOMAS OF CLARENCE
No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs.
Th' incessant care and labor of his mind
Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in
So thin that life looks through and will break out.

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER
The people fear me, for they do observe
Unfathered heirs and loathly births of nature.
The seasons change their manners, as the year
Had found some months asleep and leapt them
over.

THOMAS OF CLARENCE
The river hath thrice flowed, no ebb between,
And the old folk, time's doting chronicles,
Say it did so a little time before
That our great-grandsire, Edward, sicked and died.

WARWICK
Speak lower, princes, for the King recovers.

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER
This apoplexy will certain be his end.

KING
I pray you take me up and bear me hence
Into some other chamber. Softly, pray.
[The King is carried to a bed on another
part of the stage.]
Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends,
Unless some dull and favorable hand
Will whisper music to my weary spirit.

WARWICK, [to an Attendant]
Call for the music in the other room.

KING
Set me the crown upon my pillow here.
[The crown is placed on the bed.]

THOMAS OF CLARENCE, [aside to the others]
His eye is hollow, and he changes much.

WARWICK
Less noise, less noise.

[Enter Prince Harry.]


PRINCE  Who saw the Duke of Clarence?

THOMAS OF CLARENCE, [weeping]
I am here, brother, full of heaviness.

PRINCE
How now, rain within doors, and none abroad?
How doth the King?

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER  Exceeding ill.

PRINCE
Heard he the good news yet? Tell it him.

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER
He altered much upon the hearing it.

PRINCE  If he be sick with joy, he'll recover without
physic.

WARWICK
Not so much noise, my lords.--Sweet prince, speak
low.
The King your father is disposed to sleep.

THOMAS OF CLARENCE
Let us withdraw into the other room.

WARWICK
Will 't please your Grace to go along with us?

PRINCE
No, I will sit and watch here by the King.
[All but Prince and King exit.]
Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
Being so troublesome a bedfellow?
O polished perturbation, golden care,
That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide
To many a watchful night! Sleep with it now;
Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet
As he whose brow with homely biggen bound
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty,
When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit
Like a rich armor worn in heat of day,
That scald'st with safety. By his gates of breath
There lies a downy feather which stirs not;
Did he suspire, that light and weightless down
Perforce must move. My gracious lord, my father,
This sleep is sound indeed. This is a sleep
That from this golden rigol hath divorced
So many English kings. Thy due from me
Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood,
Which nature, love, and filial tenderness
Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously.
My due from thee is this imperial crown,
Which, as immediate from thy place and blood,
Derives itself to me. [He puts on the crown.] Lo,
where it sits,
Which God shall guard. And, put the world's whole
strength
Into one giant arm, it shall not force
This lineal honor from me. This from thee
Will I to mine leave, as 'tis left to me.
[He exits with the crown.]

KING, [rising up in his bed]  Warwick! Gloucester!
Clarence!

[Enter Warwick, Gloucester, Clarence, and others.]


THOMAS OF CLARENCE  Doth the King call?

WARWICK
What would your Majesty? How fares your Grace?

KING
Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?

THOMAS OF CLARENCE
We left the Prince my brother here, my liege,
Who undertook to sit and watch by you.

KING
The Prince of Wales? Where is he? Let me see him.
He is not here.

WARWICK
This door is open. He is gone this way.

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER
He came not through the chamber where we
stayed.

KING
Where is the crown? Who took it from my pillow?

WARWICK
When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.

KING
The Prince hath ta'en it hence. Go seek him out.
Is he so hasty that he doth suppose my sleep my
death?
Find him, my Lord of Warwick. Chide him hither.
[Warwick exits.]
This part of his conjoins with my disease
And helps to end me. See, sons, what things you
are,
How quickly nature falls into revolt
When gold becomes her object!
For this the foolish overcareful fathers
Have broke their sleep with thoughts,
Their brains with care, their bones with industry.
For this they have engrossed and piled up
The cankered heaps of strange-achieved gold.
For this they have been thoughtful to invest
Their sons with arts and martial exercises--
When, like the bee, tolling from every flower
The virtuous sweets,
Our thighs packed with wax, our mouths with
honey,
We bring it to the hive and, like the bees,
Are murdered for our pains. This bitter taste
Yields his engrossments to the ending father.

[Enter Warwick.]

Now where is he that will not stay so long
Till his friend sickness hath determined me?

WARWICK
My lord, I found the Prince in the next room,
Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks,
With such a deep demeanor in great sorrow
That tyranny, which never quaffed but blood,
Would, by beholding him, have washed his knife
With gentle eyedrops. He is coming hither.

KING
But wherefore did he take away the crown?

[Enter Prince Harry with the crown.]

Lo where he comes.--Come hither to me, Harry.--
Depart the chamber. Leave us here alone.
[Gloucester, Clarence, Warwick, and others exit.]

PRINCE
I never thought to hear you speak again.

KING
Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought.
I stay too long by thee; I weary thee.
Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair
That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honors
Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth,
Thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm
thee.
Stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity
Is held from falling with so weak a wind
That it will quickly drop. My day is dim.
Thou hast stol'n that which after some few hours
Were thine without offense, and at my death
Thou hast sealed up my expectation.
Thy life did manifest thou loved'st me not,
And thou wilt have me die assured of it.
Thou hid'st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts,
Whom thou hast whetted on thy stony heart
To stab at half an hour of my life.
What, canst thou not forbear me half an hour?
Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thyself,
And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear
That thou art crowned, not that I am dead.
Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse
Be drops of balm to sanctify thy head;
Only compound me with forgotten dust.
Give that which gave thee life unto the worms.
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees,
For now a time is come to mock at form.
Harry the Fifth is crowned. Up, vanity,
Down, royal state, all you sage councillors,
hence,
And to the English court assemble now,
From every region, apes of idleness.
Now, neighbor confines, purge you of your scum.
Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance,
Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit
The oldest sins the newest kind of ways?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more.
England shall double gild his treble guilt.
England shall give him office, honor, might,
For the fifth Harry from curbed license plucks
The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog
Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent.
O my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows!
When that my care could not withhold thy riots,
What wilt thou do when riot is thy care?
O, thou wilt be a wilderness again,
Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants.

PRINCE, [placing the crown on the pillow]
O pardon me, my liege! But for my tears,
The moist impediments unto my speech,
I had forestalled this dear and deep rebuke
Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard
The course of it so far. There is your crown,
And He that wears the crown immortally
Long guard it yours. [He kneels.] If I affect it
more
Than as your honor and as your renown,
Let me no more from this obedience rise,
Which my most inward true and duteous spirit
Teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending.
God witness with me, when I here came in
And found no course of breath within your Majesty,
How cold it struck my heart! If I do feign,
O, let me in my present wildness die
And never live to show th' incredulous world
The noble change that I have purposed.
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
And dead almost, my liege, to think you were,
I spake unto this crown as having sense,
And thus upbraided it: "The care on thee
depending
Hath fed upon the body of my father;
Therefore thou best of gold art worst of gold.
Other, less fine in carat, is more precious,
Preserving life in med'cine potable;
But thou, most fine, most honored, most renowned,
Hast eat thy bearer up." Thus, my most royal liege,
Accusing it, I put it on my head
To try with it, as with an enemy
That had before my face murdered my father,
The quarrel of a true inheritor.
But if it did infect my blood with joy
Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride,
If any rebel or vain spirit of mine
Did with the least affection of a welcome
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let God forever keep it from my head
And make me as the poorest vassal is
That doth with awe and terror kneel to it.

KING  O my son,
God put it in thy mind to take it hence
That thou mightst win the more thy father's love,
Pleading so wisely in excuse of it.
Come hither, Harry, sit thou by my bed
And hear, I think, the very latest counsel
That ever I shall breathe.
[The Prince rises from his knees and sits
near the bed.]
God knows, my son,
By what bypaths and indirect crook'd ways
I met this crown, and I myself know well
How troublesome it sat upon my head.
To thee it shall descend with better quiet,
Better opinion, better confirmation,
For all the soil of the achievement goes
With me into the earth. It seemed in me
But as an honor snatched with boist'rous hand,
And I had many living to upbraid
My gain of it by their assistances,
Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed,
Wounding supposed peace. All these bold fears
Thou seest with peril I have answered,
For all my reign hath been but as a scene
Acting that argument. And now my death
Changes the mood, for what in me was purchased
Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort.
So thou the garland wear'st successively.
Yet though thou stand'st more sure than I could do,
Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green,
And all my friends, which thou must make thy
friends,
Have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out,
By whose fell working I was first advanced
And by whose power I well might lodge a fear
To be again displaced; which to avoid,
I cut them off and had a purpose now
To lead out many to the Holy Land,
Lest rest and lying still might make them look
Too near unto my state. Therefore, my Harry,
Be it thy course to busy giddy minds
With foreign quarrels, that action, hence borne
out,
May waste the memory of the former days.
More would I, but my lungs are wasted so
That strength of speech is utterly denied me.
How I came by the crown, O God forgive,
And grant it may with thee in true peace live.

PRINCE  My gracious liege,
You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me.
Then plain and right must my possession be,
Which I with more than with a common pain
'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.

[Enter John of Lancaster and others.]


KING
Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
Health, peace, and happiness to my royal father.

KING
Thou bring'st me happiness and peace, son John,
But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown
From this bare withered trunk. Upon thy sight
My worldly business makes a period.
Where is my Lord of Warwick?

PRINCE  My Lord of Warwick.

[Enter Warwick.]


KING
Doth any name particular belong
Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?

WARWICK
'Tis called Jerusalem, my noble lord.

KING
Laud be to God! Even there my life must end.
It hath been prophesied to me many years,
I should not die but in Jerusalem,
Which vainly I supposed the Holy Land.
But bear me to that chamber; there I'll lie.
In that Jerusalem shall Harry die.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Shallow, Falstaff, Page, and Bardolph.]


SHALLOW  By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away
tonight.--What, Davy, I say!

FALSTAFF  You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.

SHALLOW  I will not excuse you. You shall not be
excused. Excuses shall not be admitted. There is no
excuse shall serve. You shall not be excused.--
Why, Davy!

[Enter Davy.]


DAVY  Here, sir.

SHALLOW  Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let me see, Davy, let
me see, Davy, let me see. Yea, marry, William cook,
bid him come hither.--Sir John, you shall not be
excused.

DAVY  Marry, sir, thus: those precepts cannot be served.
And again, sir: shall we sow the hade land with
wheat?

SHALLOW  With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook,
are there no young pigeons?

DAVY  Yes, sir. Here is now the smith's note for shoeing
and plow irons.	[He gives Shallow a paper.]

SHALLOW  Let it be cast and paid.--Sir John, you shall
not be excused.

DAVY  Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be
had. And, sir, do you mean to stop any of William's
wages about the sack he lost the other day at
Hinckley Fair?

SHALLOW  He shall answer it. Some pigeons, Davy, a
couple of short-legged hens, a joint of mutton, and
any pretty little tiny kickshaws, tell William cook.
[Shallow and Davy walk aside.]

DAVY  Doth the man of war stay all night, sir?

SHALLOW  Yea, Davy, I will use him well. A friend i' th'
court is better than a penny in purse. Use his men
well, Davy, for they are arrant knaves and will
backbite.

DAVY  No worse than they are back-bitten, sir, for they
have marvelous foul linen.

SHALLOW  Well-conceited, Davy. About thy business,
Davy.

DAVY  I beseech you, sir, to countenance William Visor
of Woncot against Clement Perkes o' th' hill.

SHALLOW  There is many complaints, Davy, against that
Visor. That Visor is an arrant knave, on my
knowledge.

DAVY  I grant your Worship that he is a knave, sir, but
yet, God forbid, sir, but a knave should have some
countenance at his friend's request. An honest
man, sir, is able to speak for himself when a knave is
not. I have served your Worship truly, sir, this eight
years; an I cannot once or twice in a quarter bear
out a knave against an honest man, I have but a
very little credit with your Worship. The knave is
mine honest friend, sir; therefore I beseech you let
him be countenanced.

SHALLOW  Go to, I say, he shall have no wrong. Look
about, Davy. [Davy exits.] Where are you, Sir John?
Come, come, come, off with your boots.--Give me
your hand, Master Bardolph.

BARDOLPH  I am glad to see your Worship.

SHALLOW  I thank thee with all my heart, kind Master
Bardolph, [(to Page)] and welcome, my tall
fellow.--Come, Sir John.

FALSTAFF  I'll follow you, good Master Robert Shallow.
[Shallow exits.] Bardolph, look to our horses. [Bardolph
and Page exit.] If I were sawed into quantities,
I should make four dozen of such bearded hermits'
staves as Master Shallow. It is a wonderful thing to
see the semblable coherence of his men's spirits
and his. They, by observing of him, do bear
themselves like foolish justices; he, by conversing
with them, is turned into a justice-like servingman.
Their spirits are so married in conjunction with the
participation of society that they flock together in
consent like so many wild geese. If I had a suit to
Master Shallow, I would humor his men with the
imputation of being near their master; if to his men,
I would curry with Master Shallow that no man
could better command his servants. It is certain
that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is
caught, as men take diseases, one of another. Therefore
let men take heed of their company. I will
devise matter enough out of this Shallow to keep
Prince Harry in continual laughter the wearing out
of six fashions, which is four terms, or two actions,
and he shall laugh without intervallums. O, it is
much that a lie with a slight oath and a jest with a
sad brow will do with a fellow that never had the
ache in his shoulders. O, you shall see him laugh till
his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up.

SHALLOW, [within]  Sir John.

FALSTAFF  I come, Master Shallow, I come, Master
Shallow.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Warwick and Lord Chief Justice.]


WARWICK
How now, my Lord Chief Justice, whither away?

CHIEF JUSTICE  How doth the King?

WARWICK
Exceeding well. His cares are now all ended.

CHIEF JUSTICE
I hope, not dead.

WARWICK  He's walked the way of nature,
And to our purposes he lives no more.

CHIEF JUSTICE
I would his Majesty had called me with him.
The service that I truly did his life
Hath left me open to all injuries.

WARWICK
Indeed, I think the young king loves you not.

CHIEF JUSTICE
I know he doth not, and do arm myself
To welcome the condition of the time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me
Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.

[Enter John, Thomas, and Humphrey.]


WARWICK
Here come the heavy issue of dead Harry.
O, that the living Harry had the temper
Of he the worst of these three gentlemen!
How many nobles then should hold their places
That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!

CHIEF JUSTICE
O God, I fear all will be overturned.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow.

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER, THOMAS OF CLARENCE  Good morrow, cousin.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
We meet like men that had forgot to speak.

WARWICK
We do remember, but our argument
Is all too heavy to admit much talk.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy.

CHIEF JUSTICE
Peace be with us, lest we be heavier.

HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER
O, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed,
And I dare swear you borrow not that face
Of seeming sorrow; it is sure your own.

JOHN OF LANCASTER, [to the Chief Justice]
Though no man be assured what grace to find,
You stand in coldest expectation.
I am the sorrier; would 'twere otherwise.

THOMAS OF CLARENCE
Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstaff fair,
Which swims against your stream of quality.

CHIEF JUSTICE
Sweet princes, what I did I did in honor,
Led by th' impartial conduct of my soul;
And never shall you see that I will beg
A ragged and forestalled remission.
If truth and upright innocency fail me,
I'll to the king my master that is dead
And tell him who hath sent me after him.

[Enter the Prince, as Henry V, and Blunt.]


WARWICK  Here comes the Prince.

CHIEF JUSTICE
Good morrow, and God save your Majesty.

PRINCE
This new and gorgeous garment majesty
Sits not so easy on me as you think.--
Brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear.
This is the English, not the Turkish court;
Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds,
But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers,
For, by my faith, it very well becomes you.
Sorrow so royally in you appears
That I will deeply put the fashion on
And wear it in my heart. Why then, be sad.
But entertain no more of it, good brothers,
Than a joint burden laid upon us all.
For me, by heaven, I bid you be assured,
I'll be your father and your brother too.
Let me but bear your love, I'll bear your cares.
Yet weep that Harry's dead, and so will I,
But Harry lives that shall convert those tears
By number into hours of happiness.

BROTHERS
We hope no otherwise from your Majesty.

PRINCE
You all look strangely on me. [To the Chief Justice.]
And you most.
You are, I think, assured I love you not.

CHIEF JUSTICE
I am assured, if I be measured rightly,
Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.

PRINCE
No? How might a prince of my great hopes forget
So great indignities you laid upon me?
What, rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison
Th' immediate heir of England? Was this easy?
May this be washed in Lethe and forgotten?

CHIEF JUSTICE
I then did use the person of your father;
The image of his power lay then in me.
And in th' administration of his law,
Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the King whom I presented,
And struck me in my very seat of judgment,
Whereon, as an offender to your father,
I gave bold way to my authority
And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
To have a son set your decrees at nought?
To pluck down justice from your awful bench?
To trip the course of law and blunt the sword
That guards the peace and safety of your person?
Nay more, to spurn at your most royal image
And mock your workings in a second body?
Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours;
Be now the father and propose a son,
Hear your own dignity so much profaned,
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,
Behold yourself so by a son disdained,
And then imagine me taking your part
And in your power soft silencing your son.
After this cold considerance, sentence me,
And, as you are a king, speak in your state
What I have done that misbecame my place,
My person, or my liege's sovereignty.

PRINCE
You are right, justice, and you weigh this well.
Therefore still bear the balance and the sword.
And I do wish your honors may increase
Till you do live to see a son of mine
Offend you and obey you as I did.
So shall I live to speak my father's words:
"Happy am I that have a man so bold
That dares do justice on my proper son;
And not less happy, having such a son
That would deliver up his greatness so
Into the hands of justice." You did commit me,
For which I do commit into your hand
Th' unstained sword that you have used to bear,
With this remembrance: that you use the same
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit
As you have done 'gainst me. There is my hand.
[They clasp hands.]
You shall be as a father to my youth,
My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear,
And I will stoop and humble my intents
To your well-practiced wise directions.--
And, princes all, believe me, I beseech you:
My father is gone wild into his grave,
For in his tomb lie my affections,
And with his spirits sadly I survive
To mock the expectation of the world,
To frustrate prophecies, and to raze out
Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down
After my seeming. The tide of blood in me
Hath proudly flowed in vanity till now.
Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea,
Where it shall mingle with the state of floods
And flow henceforth in formal majesty.
Now call we our high court of parliament,
And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel
That the great body of our state may go
In equal rank with the best-governed nation;
That war, or peace, or both at once, may be
As things acquainted and familiar to us,
[To the Chief Justice.] In which you, father, shall
have foremost hand.
Our coronation done, we will accite,
As I before remembered, all our state.
And, God consigning to my good intents,
No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say
God shorten Harry's happy life one day.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Sir John Falstaff, Shallow, Silence, Davy,
Bardolph, and Page.]


SHALLOW  Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an
arbor, we will eat a last year's pippin of mine own
graffing, with a dish of caraways, and so forth.--
Come, cousin Silence.--And then to bed.

FALSTAFF  Fore God, you have here a goodly dwelling,
and a rich.

SHALLOW  Barren, barren, barren, beggars all, beggars
all, Sir John. Marry, good air.--Spread, Davy,
spread, Davy. Well said, Davy.

FALSTAFF  This Davy serves you for good uses. He is
your servingman and your husband.

SHALLOW  A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good
varlet, Sir John. By the Mass, I have drunk too
much sack at supper. A good varlet. Now sit down,
now sit down.--Come, cousin.

SILENCE  Ah, sirrah, quoth he, we shall
[Sings.] 	Do nothing but eat and make good cheer,
	And praise God for the merry year,
	When flesh is cheap and females dear,
	And lusty lads roam here and there
		So merrily,
	And ever among so merrily.

FALSTAFF  There's a merry heart!--Good Master Silence,
I'll give you a health for that anon.

SHALLOW  Give Master Bardolph some wine, Davy.

DAVY, [to the guests]  Sweet sir, sit. I'll be with you
anon. Most sweet sir, sit. Master page, good master
page, sit. Proface. What you want in meat, we'll
have in drink, but you must bear. The heart's all.
[He exits.]

SHALLOW  Be merry, Master Bardolph.--And, my little
soldier there, be merry.

SILENCE [sings]
	Be merry, be merry, my wife has all,
	For women are shrews, both short and tall.
	'Tis merry in hall when beards wags all,
	And welcome merry Shrovetide.
	Be merry, be merry.

FALSTAFF  I did not think Master Silence had been a
man of this mettle.

SILENCE  Who, I? I have been merry twice and once ere
now.

[Enter Davy.]


DAVY, [to the guests]  There's a dish of leather-coats for
you.

SHALLOW  Davy!

DAVY  Your Worship, I'll be with you straight.--A cup
of wine, sir.

SILENCE [sings]
	A cup of wine that's brisk and fine,
	And drink unto thee, leman mine,
	And a merry heart lives long-a.

FALSTAFF  Well said, Master Silence.

SILENCE  And we shall be merry; now comes in the
sweet o' th' night.

FALSTAFF  Health and long life to you, Master Silence.

SILENCE [sings]
	Fill the cup, and let it come,
	I'll pledge you a mile to th' bottom.

SHALLOW  Honest Bardolph, welcome. If thou want'st
anything and wilt not call, beshrew thy heart.--
Welcome, my little tiny thief, and welcome indeed
too. I'll drink to Master Bardolph, and to all the
cabileros about London.

DAVY  I hope to see London once ere I die.

BARDOLPH  An I might see you there, Davy!

SHALLOW  By the Mass, you'll crack a quart together,
ha, will you not, Master Bardolph?

BARDOLPH  Yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.

SHALLOW  By God's liggens, I thank thee. The knave
will stick by thee, I can assure thee that. He will not
out, he. 'Tis true bred!

BARDOLPH  And I'll stick by him, sir.

SHALLOW  Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing, be
merry. [(One knocks at door.)] Look who's at door
there, ho. Who knocks?	[Davy exits.]

FALSTAFF  Why, now you have done me right.

SILENCE [sings]
	Do me right,
	And dub me knight,
	Samingo.
Is 't not so?

FALSTAFF  'Tis so.

SILENCE  Is 't so? Why then, say an old man can do
somewhat.

[Enter Davy.]


DAVY  An 't please your Worship, there's one Pistol
come from the court with news.

FALSTAFF  From the court? Let him come in.

[Enter Pistol.]

How now, Pistol?

PISTOL  Sir John, God save you.

FALSTAFF  What wind blew you hither, Pistol?

PISTOL  Not the ill wind which blows no man to good.
Sweet knight, thou art now one of the greatest men
in this realm.

SILENCE  By 'r Lady, I think he be, but Goodman Puff of
Barson.

PISTOL  Puff?
Puff in thy teeth, most recreant coward base!--
Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend,
And helter-skelter have I rode to thee,
And tidings do I bring, and lucky joys,
And golden times, and happy news of price.

FALSTAFF  I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of
this world.

PISTOL
A foutre for the world and worldlings base!
I speak of Africa and golden joys.

FALSTAFF
O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news?
Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.

SILENCE [sings]
	And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John.

PISTOL
Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons,
And shall good news be baffled?
Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap.

SHALLOW  Honest gentleman, I know not your
breeding.

PISTOL  Why then, lament therefor.

SHALLOW  Give me pardon, sir. If, sir, you come with
news from the court, I take it there's but two ways,
either to utter them, or to conceal them. I am, sir,
under the King in some authority.

PISTOL
Under which king, besonian? Speak or die.

SHALLOW
Under King Harry.

PISTOL  Harry the Fourth, or Fifth?

SHALLOW
Harry the Fourth.

PISTOL  A foutre for thine office!--
Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is king.
Harry the Fifth's the man. I speak the truth.
When Pistol lies, do this and fig me, like
The bragging Spaniard.	[Pistol makes a fig.]

FALSTAFF  What, is the old king dead?

PISTOL
As nail in door. The things I speak are just.

FALSTAFF  Away, Bardolph.--Saddle my horse.--
Master Robert Shallow, choose what office thou
wilt in the land, 'tis thine.--Pistol, I will double-charge
thee with dignities.

BARDOLPH  O joyful day! I would not take a knight-hood
for my fortune.

PISTOL  What, I do bring good news!

FALSTAFF  Carry Master Silence to bed.--Master Shallow,
my Lord Shallow, be what thou wilt. I am
Fortune's steward. Get on thy boots. We'll ride all
night.--O sweet Pistol!--Away, Bardolph!--Come,
Pistol, utter more to me, and withal devise something
to do thyself good.--Boot, boot, Master Shallow.
I know the young king is sick for me. Let us
take any man's horses. The laws of England are at
my commandment. Blessed are they that have been
my friends, and woe to my Lord Chief Justice!

PISTOL
Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!
"Where is the life that late I led?" say they.
Why, here it is. Welcome these pleasant days.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Hostess Quickly, Doll Tearsheet, and Beadles.]


HOSTESS  No, thou arrant knave. I would to God that I
might die, that I might have thee hanged. Thou hast
drawn my shoulder out of joint.

BEADLE  The Constables have delivered her over to me,
and she shall have whipping cheer enough, I
warrant her. There hath been a man or two lately
killed about her.

DOLL  Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie! Come on, I'll tell
thee what, thou damned tripe-visaged rascal: an the
child I now go with do miscarry, thou wert better
thou hadst struck thy mother, thou paper-faced
villain.

HOSTESS  O the Lord, that Sir John were come! I would
make this a bloody day to somebody. But I pray God
the fruit of her womb might miscarry.

BEADLE  If it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions
again; you have but eleven now. Come, I charge you
both go with me, for the man is dead that you and
Pistol beat amongst you.

DOLL  I'll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I will
have you as soundly swinged for this, you bluebottle
rogue, you filthy famished correctioner. If you be
not swinged, I'll forswear half-kirtles.

BEADLE  Come, come, you she-knight-errant, come.

HOSTESS  O God, that right should thus overcome
might! Well, of sufferance comes ease.

DOLL  Come, you rogue, come, bring me to a justice.

HOSTESS  Ay, come, you starved bloodhound.

DOLL  Goodman Death, Goodman Bones!

HOSTESS  Thou atomy, thou!

DOLL  Come, you thin thing, come, you rascal.

BEADLE  Very well.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter two Grooms.]


FIRST GROOM  More rushes, more rushes.

SECOND GROOM  The trumpets have sounded twice.

FIRST GROOM  'Twill be two o'clock ere they come
from the coronation. Dispatch, dispatch.
[Grooms exit.]

[Trumpets sound, and the King and his train pass over
the stage. After them enter Falstaff, Shallow, Pistol,
Bardolph, and the Page.]


FALSTAFF  Stand here by me, Master Robert Shallow. I
will make the King do you grace. I will leer upon
him as he comes by, and do but mark the countenance
that he will give me.

PISTOL  God bless thy lungs, good knight!

FALSTAFF  Come here, Pistol, stand behind me.--O, if I
had had time to have made new liveries, I would
have bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed of
you. But 'tis no matter. This poor show doth better.
This doth infer the zeal I had to see him.

SHALLOW  It doth so.

FALSTAFF  It shows my earnestness of affection--

SHALLOW  It doth so.

FALSTAFF  My devotion--

SHALLOW  It doth, it doth, it doth.

FALSTAFF  As it were, to ride day and night, and not to
deliberate, not to remember, not to have patience
to shift me--

SHALLOW  It is best, certain.

FALSTAFF  But to stand stained with travel and sweating
with desire to see him, thinking of nothing else,
putting all affairs else in oblivion, as if there were
nothing else to be done but to see him.

PISTOL  'Tis semper idem, for obsque hoc nihil est; 'tis
all in every part.

SHALLOW  'Tis so indeed.

PISTOL  My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver, and
make thee rage. Thy Doll and Helen of thy noble
thoughts is in base durance and contagious prison,
haled thither by most mechanical and dirty hand.
Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto's
snake, for Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth.

FALSTAFF  I will deliver her.
[Shouts within. The trumpets sound.]

PISTOL
There roared the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.

[Enter the King and his train.]


FALSTAFF
God save thy Grace, King Hal, my royal Hal.

PISTOL
The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal
imp of fame!

FALSTAFF  God save thee, my sweet boy!

KING
My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.

CHIEF JUSTICE, [to Falstaff]
Have you your wits? Know you what 'tis you
speak?

FALSTAFF, [to the King]
My king, my Jove, I speak to thee, my heart!

KING
I know thee not, old man. Fall to thy prayers.
How ill white hairs becomes a fool and jester.
I have long dreamt of such a kind of man,
So surfeit-swelled, so old, and so profane;
But being awaked, I do despise my dream.
Make less thy body hence, and more thy grace;
Leave gormandizing. Know the grave doth gape
For thee thrice wider than for other men.
Reply not to me with a fool-born jest.
Presume not that I am the thing I was,
For God doth know--so shall the world perceive--
That I have turned away my former self.
So will I those that kept me company.
When thou dost hear I am as I have been,
Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast,
The tutor and the feeder of my riots.
Till then I banish thee, on pain of death,
As I have done the rest of my misleaders,
Not to come near our person by ten mile.
For competence of life I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evils.
And, as we hear you do reform yourselves,
We will, according to your strengths and qualities,
Give you advancement. [To the Lord Chief Justice.]
Be it your charge, my lord,
To see performed the tenor of my word.--
Set on.
[King and his train exit.]

FALSTAFF  Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound.

SHALLOW  Yea, marry, Sir John, which I beseech you to
let me have home with me.

FALSTAFF  That can hardly be, Master Shallow. Do not
you grieve at this. I shall be sent for in private to
him. Look you, he must seem thus to the world.
Fear not your advancements. I will be the man yet
that shall make you great.

SHALLOW  I cannot well perceive how, unless you
should give me your doublet and stuff me out with
straw. I beseech you, good Sir John, let me have five
hundred of my thousand.

FALSTAFF  Sir, I will be as good as my word. This that
you heard was but a color.

SHALLOW  A color that I fear you will die in, Sir John.

FALSTAFF  Fear no colors. Go with me to dinner.--
Come, lieutenant Pistol.--Come, Bardolph.--I
shall be sent for soon at night.

[Enter the Lord Chief Justice and Prince John, with
Officers.]


CHIEF JUSTICE
Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet.
Take all his company along with him.

FALSTAFF  My lord, my lord --

CHIEF JUSTICE
I cannot now speak. I will hear you soon.--
Take them away.

PISTOL  Si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta.
[All but John of Lancaster and
Chief Justice exit.]

JOHN OF LANCASTER
I like this fair proceeding of the King's.
He hath intent his wonted followers
Shall all be very well provided for,
But all are banished till their conversations
Appear more wise and modest to the world.

CHIEF JUSTICE  And so they are.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
The King hath called his parliament, my lord.

CHIEF JUSTICE  He hath.

JOHN OF LANCASTER
I will lay odds that, ere this year expire,
We bear our civil swords and native fire
As far as France. I heard a bird so sing,
Whose music, to my thinking, pleased the King.
Come, will you hence?
[They exit.]


EPILOGUE
========

   First my fear, then my curtsy, last my speech. My
fear is your displeasure, my curtsy my duty, and my
speech, to beg your pardons. If you look for a good
speech now, you undo me, for what I have to say is
of mine own making, and what indeed I should say
will, I doubt, prove mine own marring.
   But to the purpose, and so to the venture. Be it
known to you, as it is very well, I was lately here in
the end of a displeasing play to pray your patience
for it and to promise you a better. I meant indeed to
pay you with this, which, if like an ill venture it
come unluckily home, I break, and you, my gentle
creditors, lose. Here I promised you I would be,
and here I commit my body to your mercies. Bate
me some, and I will pay you some, and, as most
debtors do, promise you infinitely. And so I kneel
down before you, but, indeed, to pray for the
Queen.
   If my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me,
will you command me to use my legs? And yet that
were but light payment, to dance out of your debt.
But a good conscience will make any possible
satisfaction, and so would I. All the gentlewomen
here have forgiven me; if the gentlemen will not,
then the gentlemen do not agree with the gentlewomen,
which was never seen before in such an
assembly.
   One word more, I beseech you: if you be not too
much cloyed with fat meat, our humble author will
continue the story, with Sir John in it, and make
you merry with fair Katherine of France, where, for
anything I know, Falstaff shall die of a sweat, unless
already he be killed with your hard opinions; for
Oldcastle died a martyr, and this is not the man.
My tongue is weary; when my legs are too, I will bid
you good night.



Henry VI, Part 2
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/henry-vi-part-2/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
KING HENRY VI
QUEEN MARGARET
Humphrey, Duke of GLOUCESTER, the king's uncle, and Lord Protector
DUCHESS of Gloucester, Dame Eleanor Cobham
CARDINAL Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, the king's great-uncle
Duke of SOMERSET
Duke of SUFFOLK, William de la Pole, earlier Marquess of Suffolk
BUCKINGHAM
Lord CLIFFORD
YOUNG CLIFFORD, his son
Duke of YORK, Richard Plantagenet
Earl of SALISBURY
Earl of WARWICK, Salisbury's son
Sons of the Duke of York:
  EDWARD, Earl of March
  RICHARD
Jack CADE, leader of the Kentish rebellion
Followers of Jack Cade:
  BEVIS
  John HOLLAND
  DICK the butcher
  SMITH the weaver
  MICHAEL
  GEORGE
King Henry's supporters against Cade:
  Lord SCALES
  Lord SAYE
  Sir Humphrey STAFFORD
  His BROTHER, William Stafford
Sir John HUME, a priest
John SOUTHWELL, a priest
Margery JOURDAIN, a witch
Roger BOLINGBROKE, a conjurer
SPIRIT
Custodians of the Duchess of Gloucester:
  Sir John STANLEY
  SHERIFF
Thomas HORNER, the Duke of York's armorer
Peter THUMP, Horner the armorer's man or prentice
Two or Three PETITIONERS
Three NEIGHBORS of Horner's
Three PRENTICES, friends of Thump
A MAN of Saint Albans
Sander SIMPCOX, supposed recipient of a miracle
His WIFE
MAYOR of Saint Albans
A BEADLE of Saint Albans
LIEUTENANT, captain of a ship
Ship's MASTER
Master's MATE
Walter WHITMORE, a ship's officer
Two GENTLEMEN, prisoners
MESSENGERS
SERVANTS
A HERALD
POST, or messenger
Two or Three MURDERERS of Gloucester
VAUX
CLERK of Chartham
Two or Three CITIZENS
Alexander IDEN, a gentleman of Kent
Servants, Guards, Falconers, Attendants, Townsmen of Saint Albans, Bearers, Drummers, Commoners, Rebels, a Sawyer, Soldiers, Officers, Matthew Gough, and Others


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Flourish of trumpets, then hautboys.
Enter King Henry, Duke Humphrey of Gloucester,
Salisbury, Warwick, and Cardinal Beaufort, on the one
side; Queen Margaret, Suffolk, York, Somerset, and
Buckingham, on the other.]


SUFFOLK
As by your high imperial Majesty
I had in charge at my depart for France,
As procurator to your Excellence,
To marry Princess Margaret for your Grace,
So, in the famous ancient city Tours,
In presence of the Kings of France and Sicil,
The Dukes of Orleance, Calaber, Britaigne, and
Alanson,
Seven earls, twelve barons, and twenty reverend
bishops,
I have performed my task and was espoused;
[He kneels.]
And humbly now upon my bended knee,
In sight of England and her lordly peers,
Deliver up my title in the Queen
To your most gracious hands, that are the substance
Of that great shadow I did represent:
The happiest gift that ever marquess gave,
The fairest queen that ever king received.

KING HENRY
Suffolk, arise.--Welcome, Queen Margaret.
[Suffolk rises.]
I can express no kinder sign of love
Than this kind kiss.	[He kisses her.]
O Lord, that lends me life,
Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness!
For Thou hast given me in this beauteous face
A world of earthly blessings to my soul,
If sympathy of love unite our thoughts.

QUEEN MARGARET
Great king of England and my gracious lord,
The mutual conference that my mind hath had
By day, by night, waking and in my dreams,
In courtly company or at my beads,
With you, mine alderliefest sovereign,
Makes me the bolder to salute my king
With ruder terms, such as my wit affords
And overjoy of heart doth minister.

KING HENRY
Her sight did ravish, but her grace in speech,
Her words yclad with wisdom's majesty,
Makes me from wond'ring fall to weeping joys,
Such is the fullness of my heart's content.
Lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love.

ALL [kneel.]
Long live Queen Margaret, England's happiness!

QUEEN MARGARET  We thank you all.
[Flourish. All rise.]

SUFFOLK, [to Gloucester]
My Lord Protector, so it please your Grace,
Here are the articles of contracted peace
Between our sovereign and the French king Charles,
For eighteen months concluded by consent.
[He hands Gloucester a paper.]

GLOUCESTER [(reads)]  Imprimis, it is agreed between the
French king Charles and William de la Pole, Marquess
of Suffolk, ambassador for Henry, King of England,
that the said Henry shall espouse the Lady
Margaret, daughter unto Reignier, King of Naples,
Sicilia, and Jerusalem, and crown her Queen of England
ere the thirtieth of May next ensuing. Item,
that the duchy of Anjou and the county of Maine
shall be released and delivered to the King her
father--	[He drops the paper.]

KING HENRY
Uncle, how now?

GLOUCESTER  Pardon me, gracious lord.
Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart
And dimmed mine eyes, that I can read no further.

KING HENRY
Uncle of Winchester, I pray read on.

CARDINAL [picks up the paper and reads]  Item, it is further
agreed between them that the duchies of
Anjou and Maine shall be released and delivered to
the King her father, and she sent over of the King of
England's own proper cost and charges, without
having any dowry.

KING HENRY
They please us well.--Lord Marquess, kneel down.
[Suffolk kneels.]
We here create thee the first Duke of Suffolk
And girt thee with the sword. [Suffolk rises.] Cousin
of York,
We here discharge your Grace from being regent
I' th' parts of France till term of eighteen months
Be full expired.--Thanks, Uncle Winchester,
Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset,
Salisbury, and Warwick;
We thank you all for this great favor done
In entertainment to my princely queen.
Come, let us in, and with all speed provide
To see her coronation be performed.
[King, Queen, and Suffolk exit.
The rest remain.]

GLOUCESTER
Brave peers of England, pillars of the state,
To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief,
Your grief, the common grief of all the land.
What, did my brother Henry spend his youth,
His valor, coin, and people in the wars?
Did he so often lodge in open field,
In winter's cold and summer's parching heat,
To conquer France, his true inheritance?
And did my brother Bedford toil his wits
To keep by policy what Henry got?
Have you yourselves, Somerset, Buckingham,
Brave York, Salisbury, and victorious Warwick,
Received deep scars in France and Normandy?
Or hath mine uncle Beaufort and myself,
With all the learned council of the realm,
Studied so long, sat in the Council House,
Early and late, debating to and fro
How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe,
And had his Highness in his infancy
Crowned in Paris in despite of foes?
And shall these labors and these honors die?
Shall Henry's conquest, Bedford's vigilance,
Your deeds of war, and all our counsel die?
O peers of England, shameful is this league,
Fatal this marriage, cancelling your fame,
Blotting your names from books of memory,
Razing the characters of your renown,
Defacing monuments of conquered France,
Undoing all, as all had never been!

CARDINAL
Nephew, what means this passionate discourse,
This peroration with such circumstance?
For France, 'tis ours, and we will keep it still.

GLOUCESTER
Ay, uncle, we will keep it if we can,
But now it is impossible we should.
Suffolk, the new-made duke that rules the roast,
Hath given the duchy of Anjou and Maine
Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style
Agrees not with the leanness of his purse.

SALISBURY
Now, by the death of Him that died for all,
These counties were the keys of Normandy.
But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son?

WARWICK
For grief that they are past recovery;
For, were there hope to conquer them again,
My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no
tears.
Anjou and Maine? Myself did win them both!
Those provinces these arms of mine did conquer.
And are the cities that I got with wounds
Delivered up again with peaceful words?
Mort Dieu!

YORK
For Suffolk's duke, may he be suffocate
That dims the honor of this warlike isle!
France should have torn and rent my very heart
Before I would have yielded to this league.
I never read but England's kings have had
Large sums of gold and dowries with their wives;
And our King Henry gives away his own
To match with her that brings no vantages.

GLOUCESTER
A proper jest, and never heard before,
That Suffolk should demand a whole fifteenth
For costs and charges in transporting her!
She should have stayed in France and starved in
France
Before--

CARDINAL
My lord of Gloucester, now you grow too hot.
It was the pleasure of my lord the King.

GLOUCESTER
My lord of Winchester, I know your mind.
'Tis not my speeches that you do mislike,
But 'tis my presence that doth trouble you.
Rancor will out. Proud prelate, in thy face
I see thy fury. If I longer stay,
We shall begin our ancient bickerings.--
Lordings, farewell; and say, when I am gone,
I prophesied France will be lost ere long.
[Gloucester exits.]

CARDINAL
So, there goes our Protector in a rage.
'Tis known to you he is mine enemy,
Nay, more, an enemy unto you all,
And no great friend, I fear me, to the King.
Consider, lords, he is the next of blood
And heir apparent to the English crown.
Had Henry got an empire by his marriage,
And all the wealthy kingdoms of the West,
There's reason he should be displeased at it.
Look to it, lords. Let not his smoothing words
Bewitch your hearts; be wise and circumspect.
What though the common people favor him,
Calling him "Humphrey, the good Duke of
Gloucester,"
Clapping their hands and crying with loud voice
"Jesu maintain your royal Excellence!"
With "God preserve the good Duke Humphrey!"
I fear me, lords, for all this flattering gloss,
He will be found a dangerous Protector.

BUCKINGHAM
Why should he, then, protect our sovereign,
He being of age to govern of himself?--
Cousin of Somerset, join you with me,
And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk,
We'll quickly hoise Duke Humphrey from his seat.

CARDINAL
This weighty business will not brook delay.
I'll to the Duke of Suffolk presently.	[Cardinal exits.]

SOMERSET
Cousin of Buckingham, though Humphrey's pride
And greatness of his place be grief to us,
Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal.
His insolence is more intolerable
Than all the princes' in the land besides.
If Gloucester be displaced, he'll be Protector.

BUCKINGHAM
Or thou or I, Somerset, will be Protector,
Despite Duke Humphrey or the Cardinal.
[Buckingham and Somerset exit.]

SALISBURY
Pride went before; Ambition follows him.
While these do labor for their own preferment,
Behooves it us to labor for the realm.
I never saw but Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester,
Did bear him like a noble gentleman.
Oft have I seen the haughty cardinal,
More like a soldier than a man o' th' Church,
As stout and proud as he were lord of all,
Swear like a ruffian and demean himself
Unlike the ruler of a commonweal.--
Warwick, my son, the comfort of my age,
Thy deeds, thy plainness, and thy housekeeping
Hath won the greatest favor of the Commons,
Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey.--
And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland,
In bringing them to civil discipline,
Thy late exploits done in the heart of France,
When thou wert regent for our sovereign,
Have made thee feared and honored of the people.
Join we together for the public good
In what we can to bridle and suppress
The pride of Suffolk and the Cardinal,
With Somerset's and Buckingham's ambition;
And, as we may, cherish Duke Humphrey's deeds
While they do tend the profit of the land.

WARWICK
So God help Warwick, as he loves the land
And common profit of his country!

YORK
And so says York--[aside] for he hath greatest
cause.

SALISBURY
Then let's make haste away and look unto the main.

WARWICK
Unto the main? O father, Maine is lost!
That Maine which by main force Warwick did win
And would have kept so long as breath did last!
Main chance, father, you meant; but I meant Maine,
Which I will win from France or else be slain.
[Warwick and Salisbury exit.
York remains.]

YORK
Anjou and Maine are given to the French;
Paris is lost; the state of Normandy
Stands on a tickle point now they are gone.
Suffolk concluded on the articles,
The peers agreed, and Henry was well pleased
To change two dukedoms for a duke's fair daughter.
I cannot blame them all. What is 't to them?
'Tis thine they give away, and not their own.
Pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their
pillage,
And purchase friends, and give to courtesans,
Still reveling like lords till all be gone;
Whileas the silly owner of the goods
Weeps over them, and wrings his hapless hands,
And shakes his head, and trembling stands aloof,
While all is shared and all is borne away,
Ready to starve, and dare not touch his own.
So York must sit and fret and bite his tongue
While his own lands are bargained for and sold.
Methinks the realms of England, France, and
Ireland
Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood
As did the fatal brand Althaea burnt
Unto the Prince's heart of Calydon.
Anjou and Maine both given unto the French!
Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile England's soil.
A day will come when York shall claim his own;
And therefore I will take the Nevilles' parts
And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey,
And, when I spy advantage, claim the crown,
For that's the golden mark I seek to hit.
Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right,
Nor hold the scepter in his childish fist,
Nor wear the diadem upon his head,
Whose churchlike humors fits not for a crown.
Then, York, be still awhile till time do serve.
Watch thou and wake, when others be asleep,
To pry into the secrets of the state
Till Henry, surfeiting in joys of love
With his new bride and England's dear-bought
queen,
And Humphrey with the peers be fall'n at jars.
Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose,
With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumed,
And in my standard bear the arms of York,
To grapple with the house of Lancaster;
And force perforce I'll make him yield the crown,
Whose bookish rule hath pulled fair England down.
[York exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Duke Humphrey of Gloucester and his wife
the Duchess Eleanor.]


DUCHESS
Why droops my lord like over-ripened corn
Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load?
Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows,
As frowning at the favors of the world?
Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth,
Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight?
What seest thou there? King Henry's diadem,
Enchased with all the honors of the world?
If so, gaze on and grovel on thy face
Until thy head be circled with the same.
Put forth thy hand; reach at the glorious gold.
What, is 't too short? I'll lengthen it with mine;
And, having both together heaved it up,
We'll both together lift our heads to heaven
And never more abase our sight so low
As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.

GLOUCESTER
O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy lord,
Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts!
And may that hour when I imagine ill
Against my king and nephew, virtuous Henry,
Be my last breathing in this mortal world!
My troublous dreams this night doth make me sad.

DUCHESS
What dreamed my lord? Tell me, and I'll requite it
With sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream.

GLOUCESTER
Methought this staff, mine office badge in court,
Was broke in twain--by whom I have forgot,
But, as I think, it was by th' Cardinal--
And on the pieces of the broken wand
Were placed the heads of Edmund, Duke of
Somerset,
And William de la Pole, first Duke of Suffolk.
This was my dream. What it doth bode God knows.

DUCHESS
Tut, this was nothing but an argument
That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove
Shall lose his head for his presumption.
But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet duke:
Methought I sat in seat of majesty,
In the cathedral church of Westminster
And in that chair where kings and queens were
crowned,
Where Henry and Dame Margaret kneeled to me
And on my head did set the diadem.

GLOUCESTER
Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright.
Presumptuous dame, ill-nurtured Eleanor,
Art thou not second woman in the realm
And the Protector's wife, beloved of him?
Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command,
Above the reach or compass of thy thought?
And wilt thou still be hammering treachery
To tumble down thy husband and thyself
From top of honor to disgrace's feet?
Away from me, and let me hear no more!

DUCHESS
What, what, my lord? Are you so choleric
With Eleanor for telling but her dream?
Next time I'll keep my dreams unto myself
And not be checked.

GLOUCESTER
Nay, be not angry. I am pleased again.

[Enter Messenger.]


MESSENGER
My Lord Protector, 'tis his Highness' pleasure
You do prepare to ride unto Saint Albans,
Whereas the King and Queen do mean to hawk.

GLOUCESTER
I go.--Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us?

DUCHESS
Yes, my good lord. I'll follow presently.
[Gloucester exits, with Messenger.]
Follow I must; I cannot go before
While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.
Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood,
I would remove these tedious stumbling blocks
And smooth my way upon their headless necks;
And, being a woman, I will not be slack
To play my part in Fortune's pageant.--
Where are you there? Sir John! Nay, fear not, man.
We are alone; here's none but thee and I.

[Enter Sir John Hume.]


HUME
Jesus preserve your royal Majesty!

DUCHESS
What sayst thou? "Majesty"? I am but "Grace."

HUME
But by the grace of God and Hume's advice,
Your Grace's title shall be multiplied.

DUCHESS
What sayst thou, man? Hast thou as yet conferred
With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch,
With Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer?
And will they undertake to do me good?

HUME
This they have promised: to show your Highness
A spirit raised from depth of underground
That shall make answer to such questions
As by your Grace shall be propounded him.

DUCHESS
It is enough. I'll think upon the questions.
When from Saint Albans we do make return,
We'll see these things effected to the full.
Here, Hume, take this reward.
[She gives him money.]
Make merry, man,
With thy confederates in this weighty cause.
[Duchess exits.]

HUME
Hume must make merry with the Duchess' gold.
Marry, and shall! But, how now, Sir John Hume?
Seal up your lips, and give no words but "mum";
The business asketh silent secrecy.
Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch;
Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil.
Yet have I gold flies from another coast--
I dare not say, from the rich cardinal
And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk,
Yet I do find it so. For, to be plain,
They, knowing Dame Eleanor's aspiring humor,
Have hired me to undermine the Duchess
And buzz these conjurations in her brain.
They say a crafty knave does need no broker,
Yet am I Suffolk and the Cardinal's broker.
Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near
To call them both a pair of crafty knaves.
Well, so it stands; and thus I fear at last
Hume's knavery will be the Duchess' wrack,
And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall.
Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter three or four Petitioners, Peter, the
Armorer's man, being one.]


FIRST PETITIONER  My masters, let's stand close. My
Lord Protector will come this way by and by, and
then we may deliver our supplications in the quill.

SECOND PETITIONER  Marry, the Lord protect him, for
he's a good man! Jesu bless him!

[Enter Suffolk, wearing the red rose,
and Queen Margaret.]


FIRST PETITIONER  Here he comes, methinks, and the
Queen with him. I'll be the first, sure.
[He steps forward.]

SECOND PETITIONER  Come back, fool! This is the Duke
of Suffolk, and not my Lord Protector.

SUFFOLK  How now, fellow? Wouldst anything with
me?

FIRST PETITIONER  I pray, my lord, pardon me. I took
you for my Lord Protector.

QUEEN MARGARET [takes a petition and reads.]  To my
Lord Protector. Are your supplications to his Lordship?
Let me see them.--What is thine?

FIRST PETITIONER  Mine is, an 't please your Grace,
against John Goodman, my Lord Cardinal's man,
for keeping my house, and lands, and wife and all,
from me.

SUFFOLK  Thy wife too? That's some wrong indeed.--
What's yours? [Taking a petition.] What's here?
[(Reads.)] Against the Duke of Suffolk for enclosing
the commons of Melford. How now, sir knave?

SECOND PETITIONER  Alas, sir, I am but a poor petitioner
of our whole township.

PETER, [showing his petition]  Against my master,
Thomas Horner, for saying that the Duke of York
was rightful heir to the crown.

QUEEN MARGARET  What sayst thou? Did the Duke of
York say he was rightful heir to the crown?

PETER  That my master was? No, forsooth. My master
said that he was and that the King was an
usurper.

SUFFOLK, [calling]  Who is there?

[Enter Servant.]

Take this fellow in, and send for his master with a
pursuivant presently.--We'll hear more of your
matter before the King.
[Peter exits with Servant.]

QUEEN MARGARET
And as for you that love to be protected
Under the wings of our Protector's grace,
Begin your suits anew, and sue to him.
[Tear the supplication.]
Away, base cullions.--Suffolk, let them go.

ALL  Come, let's be gone.	[They exit.]

QUEEN MARGARET
My lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise,
Is this the fashions in the court of England?
Is this the government of Britain's isle
And this the royalty of Albion's king?
What, shall King Henry be a pupil still
Under the surly Gloucester's governance?
Am I a queen in title and in style,
And must be made a subject to a duke?
I tell thee, Pole, when in the city Tours
Thou rann'st atilt in honor of my love
And stol'st away the ladies' hearts of France,
I thought King Henry had resembled thee
In courage, courtship, and proportion.
But all his mind is bent to holiness,
To number Ave Marys on his beads;
His champions are the prophets and apostles,
His weapons holy saws of sacred writ,
His study is his tiltyard, and his loves
Are brazen images of canonized saints.
I would the College of the Cardinals
Would choose him pope and carry him to Rome
And set the triple crown upon his head!
That were a state fit for his holiness.

SUFFOLK
Madam, be patient. As I was cause
Your Highness came to England, so will I
In England work your Grace's full content.

QUEEN MARGARET
Besides the haughty Protector, have we Beaufort
The imperious churchman, Somerset, Buckingham,
And grumbling York; and not the least of these
But can do more in England than the King.

SUFFOLK
And he of these that can do most of all
Cannot do more in England than the Nevilles;
Salisbury and Warwick are no simple peers.

QUEEN MARGARET
Not all these lords do vex me half so much
As that proud dame, the Lord Protector's wife.
She sweeps it through the court with troops of
ladies,
More like an empress than Duke Humphrey's wife.
Strangers in court do take her for the Queen.
She bears a duke's revenues on her back,
And in her heart she scorns our poverty.
Shall I not live to be avenged on her?
Contemptuous baseborn callet as she is,
She vaunted 'mongst her minions t' other day
The very train of her worst wearing gown
Was better worth than all my father's lands
Till Suffolk gave two dukedoms for his daughter.

SUFFOLK
Madam, myself have limed a bush for her
And placed a choir of such enticing birds
That she will light to listen to the lays
And never mount to trouble you again.
So let her rest. And, madam, list to me,
For I am bold to counsel you in this:
Although we fancy not the Cardinal,
Yet must we join with him and with the lords
Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.
As for the Duke of York, this late complaint
Will make but little for his benefit.
So, one by one, we'll weed them all at last,
And you yourself shall steer the happy helm.

[Sound a sennet. Enter King Henry, Duke Humphrey
of Gloucester, Cardinal, Somerset, wearing the red
rose, Buckingham, Salisbury; York and Warwick, both
wearing the white rose; and the Duchess of
Gloucester.]


KING HENRY
For my part, noble lords, I care not which;
Or Somerset or York, all's one to me.

YORK
If York have ill demeaned himself in France,
Then let him be denied the regentship.

SOMERSET
If Somerset be unworthy of the place,
Let York be regent; I will yield to him.

WARWICK
Whether your Grace be worthy, yea or no,
Dispute not that. York is the worthier.

CARDINAL
Ambitious Warwick, let thy betters speak.

WARWICK
The Cardinal's not my better in the field.

BUCKINGHAM
All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.

WARWICK
Warwick may live to be the best of all.

SALISBURY
Peace, son.--And show some reason, Buckingham,
Why Somerset should be preferred in this.

QUEEN MARGARET
Because the King, forsooth, will have it so.

GLOUCESTER
Madam, the King is old enough himself
To give his censure. These are no women's matters.

QUEEN MARGARET
If he be old enough, what needs your Grace
To be Protector of his Excellence?

GLOUCESTER
Madam, I am Protector of the realm,
And at his pleasure will resign my place.

SUFFOLK
Resign it, then, and leave thine insolence.
Since thou wert king--as who is king but thou?--
The commonwealth hath daily run to wrack,
The Dauphin hath prevailed beyond the seas,
And all the peers and nobles of the realm
Have been as bondmen to thy sovereignty.

CARDINAL, [to Gloucester]
The Commons hast thou racked; the clergy's bags
Are lank and lean with thy extortions.

SOMERSET, [to Gloucester]
Thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife's attire
Have cost a mass of public treasury.

BUCKINGHAM, [to Gloucester]
Thy cruelty in execution
Upon offenders hath exceeded law
And left thee to the mercy of the law.

QUEEN MARGARET, [to Gloucester]
Thy sale of offices and towns in France,
If they were known, as the suspect is great,
Would make thee quickly hop without thy head.
[Gloucester exits.]
[Queen Margaret drops her fan.]
[To Duchess.] Give me my fan. What, minion, can
you not?	[She gives the Duchess a box on the ear.]
I cry you mercy, madam. Was it you?

DUCHESS
Was 't I? Yea, I it was, proud Frenchwoman.
Could I come near your beauty with my nails,
I'd set my ten commandments in your face.

KING HENRY
Sweet aunt, be quiet. 'Twas against her will.

DUCHESS
Against her will, good king? Look to 't in time.
She'll hamper thee and dandle thee like a baby.
Though in this place most master wear no breeches,
She shall not strike Dame Eleanor unrevenged.
[Eleanor, the Duchess, exits.]

BUCKINGHAM, [aside to Cardinal]
Lord Cardinal, I will follow Eleanor
And listen after Humphrey how he proceeds.
She's tickled now; her fume needs no spurs;
She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.
[Buckingham exits.]

[Enter Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester.]


GLOUCESTER
Now, lords, my choler being overblown
With walking once about the quadrangle,
I come to talk of commonwealth affairs.
As for your spiteful false objections,
Prove them, and I lie open to the law;
But God in mercy so deal with my soul
As I in duty love my king and country!
But, to the matter that we have in hand:
I say, my sovereign, York is meetest man
To be your regent in the realm of France.

SUFFOLK
Before we make election, give me leave
To show some reason, of no little force,
That York is most unmeet of any man.

YORK
I'll tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet:
First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride;
Next, if I be appointed for the place,
My lord of Somerset will keep me here
Without discharge, money, or furniture
Till France be won into the Dauphin's hands.
Last time I danced attendance on his will
Till Paris was besieged, famished, and lost.

WARWICK
That can I witness, and a fouler fact
Did never traitor in the land commit.

SUFFOLK  Peace, headstrong Warwick!

WARWICK
Image of pride, why should I hold my peace?

[Enter Horner, the Armorer, and his Man
Peter, under guard.]


SUFFOLK
Because here is a man accused of treason.
Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!

YORK
Doth anyone accuse York for a traitor?

KING HENRY
What mean'st thou, Suffolk? Tell me, what are
these?

SUFFOLK
Please it your Majesty, this is the man
That doth accuse his master of high treason.
His words were these: that Richard, Duke of York,
Was rightful heir unto the English crown,
And that your Majesty was an usurper.

KING HENRY  Say, man, were these thy words?

HORNER  An 't shall please your Majesty, I never said
nor thought any such matter. God is my witness, I
am falsely accused by the villain.

PETER  By these ten bones, my lords, he did speak
them to me in the garret one night as we were
scouring my lord of York's armor.

YORK, [to Horner]
Base dunghill villain and mechanical,
I'll have thy head for this thy traitor's speech!--
I do beseech your royal Majesty,
Let him have all the rigor of the law.

HORNER  Alas, my lord, hang me if ever I spake the
words. My accuser is my prentice; and when I did
correct him for his fault the other day, he did vow
upon his knees he would be even with me. I have
good witness of this. Therefore I beseech your
Majesty, do not cast away an honest man for a
villain's accusation!

KING HENRY
Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?

GLOUCESTER
This doom, my lord, if I may judge:
Let Somerset be regent o'er the French,
Because in York this breeds suspicion;
And let these have a day appointed them
For single combat in convenient place,
For he hath witness of his servant's malice.
This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey's doom.

SOMERSET
I humbly thank your royal Majesty.

HORNER
And I accept the combat willingly.

PETER  Alas, my lord, I cannot fight; for God's sake pity
my case! The spite of man prevaileth against me. O
Lord, have mercy upon me! I shall never be able to
fight a blow. O Lord, my heart!

GLOUCESTER
Sirrah, or you must fight or else be hanged.

KING HENRY  Away with them to prison; and the day of
combat shall be the last of the next month.--
Come, Somerset, we'll see thee sent away.
[Flourish. They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter the Witch Margery Jourdain, the two Priests
Hume and Southwell, and Bolingbroke, a conjurer.]


HUME  Come, my masters. The Duchess, I tell you,
expects performance of your promises.

BOLINGBROKE  Master Hume, we are therefore provided.
Will her Ladyship behold and hear our
exorcisms?

HUME  Ay, what else? Fear you not her courage.

BOLINGBROKE  I have heard her reported to be a
woman of an invincible spirit. But it shall be convenient,
Master Hume, that you be by her aloft
while we be busy below; and so, I pray you, go, in
God's name, and leave us.	[Hume exits.]
Mother Jourdain, be you prostrate and grovel on
the earth. [She lies face downward.] John Southwell,
read you; and let us to our work.

[Enter Eleanor, Duchess of Gloucester,
with Hume, aloft.]


DUCHESS  Well said, my masters, and welcome all. To
this gear, the sooner the better.

BOLINGBROKE
Patience, good lady. Wizards know their times.
Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night,
The time of night when Troy was set on fire,
The time when screech owls cry and bandogs howl,
And spirits walk, and ghosts break up their graves--
That time best fits the work we have in hand.
Madam, sit you, and fear not. Whom we raise
We will make fast within a hallowed verge.

[Here they do the ceremonies belonging, and
make the circle. Bolingbroke or Southwell reads
"Conjuro te, etc." It thunders and lightens terribly;
then the Spirit riseth.]


SPIRIT  Adsum.

JOURDAIN  Asmath,
By the eternal God, whose name and power
Thou tremblest at, answer that I shall ask,
For till thou speak, thou shalt not pass from hence.

SPIRIT
Ask what thou wilt. That I had said and done!

BOLINGBROKE, [reading from a paper, while Southwell
writes]
First of the King: What shall of him become?

SPIRIT
The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose,
But him outlive and die a violent death.

BOLINGBROKE, [reads]
What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?

SPIRIT
By water shall he die and take his end.

BOLINGBROKE [reads]
What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?

SPIRIT  Let him shun castles.
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
Than where castles mounted stand.
Have done, for more I hardly can endure.

BOLINGBROKE
Descend to darkness and the burning lake!
False fiend, avoid!
[Thunder and lightning. Spirit exits, descending.]

[Enter the Duke of York and the Duke of Buckingham
with their Guard and Sir Humphrey Stafford, and
break in.]


YORK
Lay hands upon these traitors and their trash.
[The Guard arrest Margery Jourdain and her
accomplices and seize their papers.]
[To Jourdain.] Beldam, I think we watched you at an
inch.
[To the Duchess, aloft.] What, madam, are you
there? The King and commonweal
Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains.
My Lord Protector will, I doubt it not,
See you well guerdoned for these good deserts.

DUCHESS
Not half so bad as thine to England's king,
Injurious duke, that threatest where's no cause.

BUCKINGHAM
True, madam, none at all. What call you this?
[He holds up the papers seized.]
Away with them! Let them be clapped up close
And kept asunder.--You, madam, shall with us.--
Stafford, take her to thee.	[Stafford exits.]
We'll see your trinkets here all forthcoming.
All away!	[Jourdain, Southwell, and Bolingbroke
exit under guard, below; Duchess and Hume
exit, under guard, aloft.]

YORK
Lord Buckingham, methinks you watched her well.
A pretty plot, well chosen to build upon!
Now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ.
[Buckingham hands him the papers.]
What have we here?
[(Reads.)] The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose,
But him outlive and die a violent death.
Why, this is just Aio te, Aeacida,
Romanos vincere posse. Well, to the rest:
[(Reads.)] Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of
Suffolk?
By water shall he die and take his end.
What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?
Let him shun castles;
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
Than where castles mounted stand.
Come, come, my lord, these oracles
Are hardly attained and hardly understood.
The King is now in progress towards Saint Albans;
With him the husband of this lovely lady.
Thither goes these news as fast as horse can carry
them--
A sorry breakfast for my Lord Protector.

BUCKINGHAM
Your Grace shall give me leave, my lord of York,
To be the post, in hope of his reward.

YORK  At your pleasure, my good lord.
[Buckingham exits.]
Who's within there, ho!

[Enter a Servingman.]

Invite my lords of Salisbury and Warwick
To sup with me tomorrow night. Away!
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King Henry, Queen Margaret, Gloucester the
Lord Protector, Cardinal, and Suffolk, and
Attendants, with Falconers hallowing.]


QUEEN MARGARET
Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook
I saw not better sport these seven years' day.
Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high,
And, ten to one, old Joan had not gone out.

KING HENRY, [to Gloucester]
But what a point, my lord, your falcon made,
And what a pitch she flew above the rest!
To see how God in all his creatures works!
Yea, man and birds are fain of climbing high.

SUFFOLK
No marvel, an it like your Majesty,
My Lord Protector's hawks do tower so well;
They know their master loves to be aloft
And bears his thoughts above his falcon's pitch.

GLOUCESTER
My lord, 'tis but a base ignoble mind
That mounts no higher than a bird can soar.

CARDINAL
I thought as much. He would be above the clouds.

GLOUCESTER
Ay, my Lord Cardinal, how think you by that?
Were it not good your Grace could fly to heaven?

KING HENRY
The treasury of everlasting joy.

CARDINAL, [to Gloucester]
Thy heaven is on Earth; thine eyes and thoughts
Beat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart.
Pernicious Protector, dangerous peer,
That smooth'st it so with king and commonweal!

GLOUCESTER
What, cardinal, is your priesthood grown
peremptory?
Tantaene animis caelestibus irae?
Churchmen so hot? Good uncle, hide such malice.
With such holiness, can you do it?

SUFFOLK
No malice, sir, no more than well becomes
So good a quarrel and so bad a peer.

GLOUCESTER
As who, my lord?

SUFFOLK  Why, as you, my lord,
An 't like your lordly Lord Protectorship.

GLOUCESTER
Why, Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.

QUEEN MARGARET
And thy ambition, Gloucester.

KING HENRY  I prithee peace,
Good queen, and whet not on these furious peers,
For blessed are the peacemakers on Earth.

CARDINAL
Let me be blessed for the peace I make
Against this proud Protector with my sword!

GLOUCESTER, [aside to Cardinal]
Faith, holy uncle, would 't were come to that!

CARDINAL, [aside to Gloucester]  Marry, when thou
dar'st!

GLOUCESTER, [aside to Cardinal]
Make up no factious numbers for the matter.
In thine own person answer thy abuse.

CARDINAL, [aside to Gloucester]
Ay, where thou dar'st not peep. An if thou dar'st,
This evening, on the east side of the grove.

KING HENRY
How now, my lords?

CARDINAL  Believe me, cousin Gloucester,
Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly,
We had had more sport. [(Aside to Gloucester.)]
Come with thy two-hand sword.

GLOUCESTER
True, uncle. [(Aside to Cardinal.)] Are you advised?
The east side of the grove.

CARDINAL, [aside to Gloucester]
I am with you.

KING HENRY  Why, how now, uncle Gloucester?

GLOUCESTER
Talking of hawking; nothing else, my lord.
[(Aside to Cardinal.)] Now, by God's mother, priest,
I'll shave your crown for this,
Or all my fence shall fail.

CARDINAL, [aside to Gloucester]  Medice, teipsum;
Protector, see to 't well; protect yourself.

KING HENRY
The winds grow high; so do your stomachs, lords.
How irksome is this music to my heart!
When such strings jar, what hope of harmony?
I pray, my lords, let me compound this strife.

[Enter a man from St. Albans crying "A miracle!"]


GLOUCESTER  What means this noise?--
Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim?

MAN  A miracle, a miracle!

SUFFOLK
Come to the King, and tell him what miracle.

MAN
Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Alban's shrine
Within this half hour hath received his sight,
A man that ne'er saw in his life before.

KING HENRY
Now, God be praised, that to believing souls
Gives light in darkness, comfort in despair.

[Enter the Mayor of Saint Albans, and his brethren,
bearing the man Simpcox between two in a chair,
followed by Simpcox's Wife and Others.]


CARDINAL
Here comes the townsmen on procession
To present your Highness with the man.

KING HENRY
Great is his comfort in this earthly vale,
Although by his sight his sin be multiplied.

GLOUCESTER
Stand by, my masters.--Bring him near the King.
His Highness' pleasure is to talk with him.
[The two bearers bring the chair forward.]

KING HENRY
Good fellow, tell us here the circumstance,
That we for thee may glorify the Lord.
What, hast thou been long blind and now restored?

SIMPCOX  Born blind, an 't please your Grace.

WIFE  Ay, indeed, was he.

SUFFOLK  What woman is this?

WIFE  His wife, an 't like your Worship.

GLOUCESTER  Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst
have better told.

KING HENRY  Where wert thou born?

SIMPCOX
At Berwick in the North, an 't like your Grace.

KING HENRY
Poor soul, God's goodness hath been great to thee.
Let never day nor night unhallowed pass,
But still remember what the Lord hath done.

QUEEN MARGARET
Tell me, good fellow, cam'st thou here by chance,
Or of devotion to this holy shrine?

SIMPCOX
God knows, of pure devotion, being called
A hundred times and oftener in my sleep
By good Saint Alban, who said "Simon, come,
Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee."

WIFE
Most true, forsooth, and many time and oft
Myself have heard a voice to call him so.

CARDINAL  What, art thou lame?

SIMPCOX  Ay, God Almighty help me!

SUFFOLK  How cam'st thou so?

SIMPCOX  A fall off of a tree.

WIFE  A plum tree, master.

GLOUCESTER  How long hast thou been blind?

SIMPCOX  O, born so, master.

GLOUCESTER  What, and wouldst climb a tree?

SIMPCOX  But that in all my life, when I was a youth.

WIFE  Too true, and bought his climbing very dear.

GLOUCESTER  Mass, thou lov'dst plums well, that
wouldst venture so.

SIMPCOX  Alas, good master, my wife desired some
damsons, and made me climb, with danger of my
life.

GLOUCESTER
A subtle knave, but yet it shall not serve.--
Let me see thine eyes. Wink now. Now open them.
In my opinion, yet thou seest not well.

SIMPCOX  Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God and
Saint Alban.

GLOUCESTER
Sayst thou me so? What color is this cloak of?

SIMPCOX  Red, master, red as blood.

GLOUCESTER
Why, that's well said. What color is my gown of?

SIMPCOX  Black, forsooth, coal-black as jet.

KING HENRY
Why, then, thou know'st what color jet is of.

SUFFOLK
And yet, I think, jet did he never see.

GLOUCESTER
But cloaks and gowns, before this day, a many.

WIFE
Never, before this day, in all his life.

GLOUCESTER  Tell me, sirrah, what's my name?

SIMPCOX  Alas, master, I know not.

GLOUCESTER, [pointing]  What's his name?

SIMPCOX  I know not.

GLOUCESTER, [pointing to someone else]  Nor his?

SIMPCOX  No, indeed, master.

GLOUCESTER  What's thine own name?

SIMPCOX  Sander Simpcox, an if it please you, master.

GLOUCESTER  Then, Sander, sit there, the lying'st knave
in Christendom. If thou hadst been born blind,
thou mightst as well have known all our names as
thus to name the several colors we do wear. Sight
may distinguish of colors; but suddenly to nominate
them all, it is impossible.--My lords, Saint
Alban here hath done a miracle; and would you
not think his cunning to be great that could
restore this cripple to his legs again?

SIMPCOX  O master, that you could!

GLOUCESTER  My masters of Saint Albans, have you not
beadles in your town and things called whips?

MAYOR  Yes, my lord, if it please your Grace.

GLOUCESTER  Then send for one presently.

MAYOR  Sirrah, go fetch the beadle hither straight.
[A man exits.]

GLOUCESTER  Now fetch me a stool hither by and by.
[One brings a stool.] Now, sirrah, if you mean to
save yourself from whipping, leap me over this
stool, and run away.

SIMPCOX  Alas, master, I am not able to stand alone.
You go about to torture me in vain.

[Enter a Beadle with whips.]


GLOUCESTER  Well, sir, we must have you find your
legs.--Sirrah beadle, whip him till he leap over
that same stool.

BEADLE  I will, my lord.--Come on, sirrah, off with
your doublet quickly.

SIMPCOX  Alas, master, what shall I do? I am not able to
stand.
[After the Beadle hath hit him once, he leaps
over the stool and runs away; and they follow
and cry "A miracle!"]

KING HENRY
O God, seest Thou this, and bearest so long?

QUEEN MARGARET
It made me laugh to see the villain run.

GLOUCESTER, [to the Beadle]
Follow the knave, and take this drab away.

WIFE  Alas, sir, we did it for pure need.

GLOUCESTER
Let them be whipped through every market town
Till they come to Berwick, from whence they came.
[The Beadle, Mayor, Wife, and the others from
Saint Albans exit.]

CARDINAL
Duke Humphrey has done a miracle today.

SUFFOLK
True, made the lame to leap and fly away.

GLOUCESTER
But you have done more miracles than I.
You made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly.

[Enter Buckingham.]


KING HENRY
What tidings with our cousin Buckingham?

BUCKINGHAM
Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold:
A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent,
Under the countenance and confederacy
Of Lady Eleanor, the Protector's wife,
The ringleader and head of all this rout,
Have practiced dangerously against your state,
Dealing with witches and with conjurers,
Whom we have apprehended in the fact,
Raising up wicked spirits from under ground,
Demanding of King Henry's life and death
And other of your Highness' Privy Council,
As more at large your Grace shall understand.

CARDINAL
And so, my Lord Protector, by this means
Your lady is forthcoming yet at London.
[Aside to Gloucester.] This news, I think, hath turned
your weapon's edge;
'Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour.

GLOUCESTER
Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart.
Sorrow and grief have vanquished all my powers,
And, vanquished as I am, I yield to thee,
Or to the meanest groom.

KING HENRY
O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones,
Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby!

QUEEN MARGARET
Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest,
And look thyself be faultless, thou wert best.

GLOUCESTER
Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal
How I have loved my king and commonweal;
And, for my wife, I know not how it stands.
Sorry I am to hear what I have heard.
Noble she is; but if she have forgot
Honor and virtue, and conversed with such
As, like to pitch, defile nobility,
I banish her my bed and company
And give her as a prey to law and shame
That hath dishonored Gloucester's honest name.

KING HENRY
Well, for this night we will repose us here.
Tomorrow toward London back again,
To look into this business thoroughly,
And call these foul offenders to their answers,
And poise the cause in Justice' equal scales,
Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause
prevails.
[Flourish. They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter York, Salisbury, and Warwick.]


YORK
Now, my good lords of Salisbury and Warwick,
Our simple supper ended, give me leave,
In this close walk, to satisfy myself
In craving your opinion of my title,
Which is infallible, to England's crown.

SALISBURY
My lord, I long to hear it at full.

WARWICK
Sweet York, begin; and if thy claim be good,
The Nevilles are thy subjects to command.

YORK  Then thus:
Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons:
The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales;
The second, William of Hatfield; and the third,
Lionel, Duke of Clarence; next to whom
Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster;
The fifth was Edmund Langley, Duke of York;
The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of
Gloucester;
William of Windsor was the seventh and last.
Edward the Black Prince died before his father
And left behind him Richard, his only son,
Who, after Edward the Third's death, reigned as
king
Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster,
The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt,
Crowned by the name of Henry the Fourth,
Seized on the realm, deposed the rightful king,
Sent his poor queen to France, from whence she
came,
And him to Pomfret; where, as all you know,
Harmless Richard was murdered traitorously.

WARWICK  Father, the Duke hath told the truth.
Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.

YORK
Which now they hold by force and not by right;
For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead,
The issue of the next son should have reigned.

SALISBURY
But William of Hatfield died without an heir.

YORK
The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose line
I claim the crown, had issue, Philippa, a daughter,
Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.
Edmund had issue, Roger, Earl of March;
Roger had issue: Edmund, Anne, and Eleanor.

SALISBURY
This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,
As I have read, laid claim unto the crown
And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king,
Who kept him in captivity till he died.
But to the rest.

YORK  His eldest sister, Anne,
My mother, being heir unto the crown,
Married Richard, Earl of Cambridge, who was son
To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son.
By her I claim the kingdom. She was heir
To Roger, Earl of March, who was the son
Of Edmund Mortimer, who married Philippa,
Sole daughter unto Lionel, Duke of Clarence.
So, if the issue of the elder son
Succeed before the younger, I am king.

WARWICK
What plain proceedings is more plain than this?
Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt,
The fourth son; York claims it from the third.
Till Lionel's issue fails, his should not reign.
It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee
And in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock.
Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together,
And in this private plot be we the first
That shall salute our rightful sovereign
With honor of his birthright to the crown.

SALISBURY, WARWICK, [kneeling]
Long live our sovereign Richard, England's king!

YORK
We thank you, lords. [They rise.] But I am not your
king
Till I be crowned, and that my sword be stained
With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster;
And that's not suddenly to be performed,
But with advice and silent secrecy.
Do you as I do in these dangerous days:
Wink at the Duke of Suffolk's insolence,
At Beaufort's pride, at Somerset's ambition,
At Buckingham, and all the crew of them,
Till they have snared the shepherd of the flock,
That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey.
'Tis that they seek; and they, in seeking that,
Shall find their deaths, if York can prophesy.

SALISBURY
My lord, break we off. We know your mind at full.

WARWICK
My heart assures me that the Earl of Warwick
Shall one day make the Duke of York a king.

YORK
And, Neville, this I do assure myself:
Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
The greatest man in England but the King.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Sound trumpets. Enter King Henry and State
(Queen Margaret, Gloucester, York, Salisbury, Suffolk,
and Others) with Guard, to banish the Duchess of
Gloucester, who is accompanied by Margery Jourdain,
Southwell, Hume, and Bolingbroke, all guarded.]


KING HENRY
Stand forth, Dame Eleanor Cobham, Gloucester's
wife.
In sight of God and us, your guilt is great.
Receive the sentence of the law for sins
Such as by God's book are adjudged to death.
[To Jourdain, Southwell, Hume, and Bolingbroke.]
You four, from hence to prison back again;
From thence unto the place of execution:
The witch in Smithfield shall be burnt to ashes,
And you three shall be strangled on the gallows.
[To Duchess] You, madam, for you are more nobly
born,
Despoiled of your honor in your life,
Shall, after three days' open penance done,
Live in your country here in banishment
With Sir John Stanley in the Isle of Man.

DUCHESS
Welcome is banishment. Welcome were my death.

GLOUCESTER
Eleanor, the law, thou seest, hath judged thee.
I cannot justify whom the law condemns.
[Duchess and the other prisoners exit under guard.]
Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief.
Ah, Humphrey, this dishonor in thine age
Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground.--
I beseech your Majesty give me leave to go;
Sorrow would solace, and mine age would ease.

KING HENRY
Stay, Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester. Ere thou go,
Give up thy staff. Henry will to himself
Protector be; and God shall be my hope,
My stay, my guide, and lantern to my feet.
And go in peace, Humphrey, no less beloved
Than when thou wert Protector to thy king.

QUEEN MARGARET
I see no reason why a king of years
Should be to be protected like a child.
God and King Henry govern England's realm!--
Give up your staff, sir, and the King his realm.

GLOUCESTER
My staff?--Here, noble Henry, is my staff.
[He puts down his staff before Henry.]
As willingly do I the same resign
As e'er thy father Henry made it mine;
And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it
As others would ambitiously receive it.
Farewell, good king. When I am dead and gone,
May honorable peace attend thy throne.
[Gloucester exits.]
[Henry picks up the staff.]

QUEEN MARGARET
Why, now is Henry king and Margaret queen,
And Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, scarce himself,
That bears so shrewd a maim. Two pulls at once:
His lady banished and a limb lopped off.
This staff of honor raught, there let it stand
Where it best fits to be, in Henry's hand.

SUFFOLK
Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays;
Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her youngest days.

YORK
Lords, let him go.--Please it your Majesty,
This is the day appointed for the combat,
And ready are the appellant and defendant--
The armorer and his man--to enter the lists,
So please your Highness to behold the fight.

QUEEN MARGARET
Ay, good my lord, for purposely therefor
Left I the court to see this quarrel tried.

KING HENRY
I' God's name, see the lists and all things fit.
Here let them end it, and God defend the right!

YORK
I never saw a fellow worse bestead
Or more afraid to fight than is the appellant,
The servant of this armorer, my lords.

[Enter at one door the Armorer Horner and his
Neighbors, drinking to him so much that he is drunk;
and he enters with a Drum before him and his staff with
a sandbag fastened to it; and at the other door his man
Peter, with a Drum and sandbag, and Prentices
drinking to him.]


FIRST NEIGHBOR  Here, neighbor Horner, I drink to you
in a cup of sack; and fear not, neighbor, you shall
do well enough.

SECOND NEIGHBOR  And here, neighbor, here's a cup of
charneco.

THIRD NEIGHBOR  And here's a pot of good double beer,
neighbor. Drink, and fear not your man.

HORNER  Let it come, i' faith, and I'll pledge you all.
And a fig for Peter!	[They drink.]

FIRST PRENTICE  Here, Peter, I drink to thee, and be not
afraid.

SECOND PRENTICE  Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy
master. Fight for credit of the prentices.

PETER  I thank you all. Drink, and pray for me, I pray
you, for I think I have taken my last draft in this
world. Here, Robin, an if I die, I give thee my
apron.--And, Will, thou shalt have my hammer.--
And here, Tom, take all the money that I have. [He
distributes his possessions.] O Lord, bless me, I
pray God, for I am never able to deal with my
master. He hath learnt so much fence already.

SALISBURY  Come, leave your drinking, and fall to
blows. Sirrah, what's thy name?

PETER  Peter, forsooth.

SALISBURY  Peter? What more?

PETER  Thump.

SALISBURY  Thump? Then see thou thump thy master
well.

HORNER  Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon
my man's instigation, to prove him a knave and
myself an honest man; and touching the Duke of
York, I will take my death I never meant him any
ill, nor the King, nor the Queen.--And therefore,
Peter, have at thee with a downright blow!

YORK  Dispatch. This knave's tongue begins to double.
Sound, trumpets. Alarum to the combatants!
[Trumpet sounds.]
[They fight, and Peter strikes him down.]

HORNER  Hold, Peter, hold! I confess, I confess treason.
[He dies.]

YORK  Take away his weapon.--Fellow, thank God and
the good wine in thy master's way.

PETER  O God, have I overcome mine enemies in this
presence? O Peter, thou hast prevailed in right!

KING HENRY
Go, take hence that traitor from our sight;
For by his death we do perceive his guilt.
And God in justice hath revealed to us
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Which he had thought to have murdered
wrongfully.--
Come, fellow, follow us for thy reward.
[Sound a flourish. They exit, bearing Horner's body.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Duke Humphrey of Gloucester and his Men,
in mourning cloaks.]


GLOUCESTER
Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud,
And after summer evermore succeeds
Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold;
So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet.
Sirs, what's o'clock?

SERVANT  Ten, my lord.

GLOUCESTER
Ten is the hour that was appointed me
To watch the coming of my punished duchess.
Uneath may she endure the flinty streets,
To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.
Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrook
The abject people gazing on thy face
With envious looks laughing at thy shame,
That erst did follow thy proud chariot wheels
When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets.
But, soft! I think she comes, and I'll prepare
My tearstained eyes to see her miseries.

[Enter the Duchess of Gloucester, barefoot, and in a
white sheet, with papers pinned to her back and a
taper burning in her hand, with Sir John Stanley,
the Sheriff, and Officers.]


SERVANT
So please your Grace, we'll take her from the Sheriff.

GLOUCESTER
No, stir not for your lives. Let her pass by.

DUCHESS
Come you, my lord, to see my open shame?
Now thou dost penance too. Look how they gaze!
See how the giddy multitude do point,
And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee.
Ah, Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks,
And, in thy closet pent up, rue my shame,
And ban thine enemies, both mine and thine.

GLOUCESTER
Be patient, gentle Nell. Forget this grief.

DUCHESS
Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself!
For whilst I think I am thy married wife
And thou a prince, Protector of this land,
Methinks I should not thus be led along,
Mailed up in shame, with papers on my back,
And followed with a rabble that rejoice
To see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans.
The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet,
And when I start, the envious people laugh
And bid me be advised how I tread.
Ah, Humphrey, can I bear this shameful yoke?
Trowest thou that e'er I'll look upon the world
Or count them happy that enjoys the sun?
No, dark shall be my light, and night my day.
To think upon my pomp shall be my hell.
Sometimes I'll say I am Duke Humphrey's wife
And he a prince and ruler of the land;
Yet so he ruled and such a prince he was
As he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess,
Was made a wonder and a pointing-stock
To every idle rascal follower.
But be thou mild, and blush not at my shame,
Nor stir at nothing till the ax of death
Hang over thee, as, sure, it shortly will.
For Suffolk, he that can do all in all
With her that hateth thee and hates us all,
And York and impious Beaufort, that false priest,
Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings;
And fly thou how thou canst, they'll tangle thee.
But fear not thou until thy foot be snared,
Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.

GLOUCESTER
Ah, Nell, forbear. Thou aimest all awry.
I must offend before I be attainted;
And had I twenty times so many foes,
And each of them had twenty times their power,
All these could not procure me any scathe
So long as I am loyal, true, and crimeless.
Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach?
Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped away,
But I in danger for the breach of law.
Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell.
I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience;
These few days' wonder will be quickly worn.

[Enter a Herald.]


HERALD
I summon your Grace to his Majesty's Parliament
Holden at Bury the first of this next month.

GLOUCESTER
And my consent ne'er asked herein before?
This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.
[Herald exits.]
My Nell, I take my leave.--And, master sheriff,
Let not her penance exceed the King's commission.

SHERIFF
An 't please your Grace, here my commission stays,
And Sir John Stanley is appointed now
To take her with him to the Isle of Man.

GLOUCESTER
Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here?

STANLEY
So am I given in charge, may 't please your Grace.

GLOUCESTER
Entreat her not the worse in that I pray
You use her well. The world may laugh again,
And I may live to do you kindness, if
You do it her. And so, Sir John, farewell.

DUCHESS
What, gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell?

GLOUCESTER
Witness my tears. I cannot stay to speak.
[Gloucester exits with his Men.]

DUCHESS
Art thou gone too? All comfort go with thee,
For none abides with me. My joy is death--
Death, at whose name I oft have been afeard,
Because I wished this world's eternity.--
Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence.
I care not whither, for I beg no favor;
Only convey me where thou art commanded.

STANLEY
Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man,
There to be used according to your state.

DUCHESS
That's bad enough, for I am but reproach.
And shall I, then, be used reproachfully?

STANLEY
Like to a duchess and Duke Humphrey's lady;
According to that state you shall be used.

DUCHESS
Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare,
Although thou hast been conduct of my shame.

SHERIFF
It is my office; and, madam, pardon me.

DUCHESS
Ay, ay, farewell. Thy office is discharged.
[The Sheriff and Officers exit.]
Come, Stanley, shall we go?

STANLEY
Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet,
And go we to attire you for our journey.

DUCHESS
My shame will not be shifted with my sheet.
No, it will hang upon my richest robes
And show itself, attire me how I can.
Go, lead the way. I long to see my prison.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Sound a sennet. Enter King Henry, Queen Margaret,
Cardinal, Suffolk, York, Buckingham, Salisbury, and
Warwick, and Others to the Parliament.]


KING HENRY
I muse my lord of Gloucester is not come.
'Tis not his wont to be the hindmost man,
Whate'er occasion keeps him from us now.

QUEEN MARGARET
Can you not see, or will you not observe,
The strangeness of his altered countenance?
With what a majesty he bears himself,
How insolent of late he is become,
How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself?
We know the time since he was mild and affable;
And if we did but glance a far-off look,
Immediately he was upon his knee,
That all the court admired him for submission.
But meet him now, and, be it in the morn
When everyone will give the time of day,
He knits his brow and shows an angry eye
And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee,
Disdaining duty that to us belongs.
Small curs are not regarded when they grin,
But great men tremble when the lion roars--
And Humphrey is no little man in England.
First, note that he is near you in descent,
And, should you fall, he is the next will mount.
Meseemeth then it is no policy,
Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears
And his advantage following your decease,
That he should come about your royal person
Or be admitted to your Highness' Council.
By flattery hath he won the Commons' hearts;
And when he please to make commotion,
'Tis to be feared they all will follow him.
Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted;
Suffer them now, and they'll o'ergrow the garden
And choke the herbs for want of husbandry.
The reverent care I bear unto my lord
Made me collect these dangers in the Duke.
If it be fond, call it a woman's fear,
Which fear, if better reasons can supplant,
I will subscribe and say I wronged the Duke.
My lords of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
Reprove my allegation if you can,
Or else conclude my words effectual.

SUFFOLK
Well hath your Highness seen into this duke,
And, had I first been put to speak my mind,
I think I should have told your Grace's tale.
The Duchess by his subornation,
Upon my life, began her devilish practices;
Or if he were not privy to those faults,
Yet, by reputing of his high descent--
As next the King he was successive heir,
And such high vaunts of his nobility--
Did instigate the bedlam brainsick duchess
By wicked means to frame our sovereign's fall.
Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep,
And in his simple show he harbors treason.
The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb.
No, no, my sovereign, Gloucester is a man
Unsounded yet and full of deep deceit.

CARDINAL
Did he not, contrary to form of law,
Devise strange deaths for small offenses done?

YORK
And did he not, in his protectorship,
Levy great sums of money through the realm
For soldiers' pay in France, and never sent it,
By means whereof the towns each day revolted?

BUCKINGHAM
Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown,
Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke
Humphrey.

KING HENRY
My lords, at once: the care you have of us
To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot
Is worthy praise; but, shall I speak my conscience,
Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocent
From meaning treason to our royal person
As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove.
The Duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given
To dream on evil or to work my downfall.

QUEEN MARGARET
Ah, what's more dangerous than this fond affiance?
Seems he a dove? His feathers are but borrowed,
For he's disposed as the hateful raven.
Is he a lamb? His skin is surely lent him,
For he's inclined as is the ravenous wolves.
Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit?
Take heed, my lord; the welfare of us all
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.

[Enter Somerset.]


SOMERSET
All health unto my gracious sovereign!

KING HENRY
Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France?

SOMERSET
That all your interest in those territories
Is utterly bereft you. All is lost.

KING HENRY
Cold news, Lord Somerset; but God's will be done.

YORK, [aside]
Cold news for me, for I had hope of France
As firmly as I hope for fertile England.
Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud,
And caterpillars eat my leaves away.
But I will remedy this gear ere long,
Or sell my title for a glorious grave.

[Enter Gloucester.]


GLOUCESTER
All happiness unto my lord the King!
Pardon, my liege, that I have stayed so long.

SUFFOLK
Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,
Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art.
I do arrest thee of high treason here.

GLOUCESTER
Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush
Nor change my countenance for this arrest.
A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.
The purest spring is not so free from mud
As I am clear from treason to my sovereign.
Who can accuse me? Wherein am I guilty?

YORK
'Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France
And, being Protector, stayed the soldiers' pay,
By means whereof his Highness hath lost France.

GLOUCESTER
Is it but thought so? What are they that think it?
I never robbed the soldiers of their pay
Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.
So help me God as I have watched the night--
Ay, night by night--in studying good for England!
That doit that e'er I wrested from the King,
Or any groat I hoarded to my use,
Be brought against me at my trial day!
No, many a pound of mine own proper store,
Because I would not tax the needy Commons,
Have I dispursed to the garrisons
And never asked for restitution.

CARDINAL
It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.

GLOUCESTER
I say no more than truth, so help me God.

YORK
In your protectorship, you did devise
Strange tortures for offenders, never heard of,
That England was defamed by tyranny.

GLOUCESTER
Why, 'tis well known that whiles I was Protector,
Pity was all the fault that was in me;
For I should melt at an offender's tears,
And lowly words were ransom for their fault.
Unless it were a bloody murderer
Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers,
I never gave them condign punishment.
Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured
Above the felon or what trespass else.

SUFFOLK
My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered;
But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge
Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.
I do arrest you in his Highness' name,
And here commit you to my Lord Cardinal
To keep until your further time of trial.

KING HENRY
My lord of Gloucester, 'tis my special hope
That you will clear yourself from all suspense.
My conscience tells me you are innocent.

GLOUCESTER
Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous.
Virtue is choked with foul ambition,
And charity chased hence by rancor's hand;
Foul subornation is predominant,
And equity exiled your Highness' land.
I know their complot is to have my life;
And if my death might make this island happy
And prove the period of their tyranny,
I would expend it with all willingness.
But mine is made the prologue to their play;
For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,
Will not conclude their plotted tragedy.
Beaufort's red sparkling eyes blab his heart's malice,
And Suffolk's cloudy brow his stormy hate;
Sharp Buckingham unburdens with his tongue
The envious load that lies upon his heart;
And dogged York, that reaches at the moon,
Whose overweening arm I have plucked back,
By false accuse doth level at my life.--
And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,
Causeless have laid disgraces on my head
And with your best endeavor have stirred up
My liefest liege to be mine enemy.
Ay, all of you have laid your heads together--
Myself had notice of your conventicles--
And all to make away my guiltless life.
I shall not want false witness to condemn me
Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt.
The ancient proverb will be well effected:
"A staff is quickly found to beat a dog."

CARDINAL
My liege, his railing is intolerable.
If those that care to keep your royal person
From treason's secret knife and traitor's rage
Be thus upbraided, chid, and rated at,
And the offender granted scope of speech,
'Twill make them cool in zeal unto your Grace.

SUFFOLK
Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here
With ignominious words, though clerkly couched,
As if she had suborned some to swear
False allegations to o'erthrow his state?

QUEEN MARGARET
But I can give the loser leave to chide.

GLOUCESTER
Far truer spoke than meant. I lose, indeed;
Beshrew the winners, for they played me false!
And well such losers may have leave to speak.

BUCKINGHAM
He'll wrest the sense and hold us here all day.
Lord Cardinal, he is your prisoner.

CARDINAL, [to his Men]
Sirs, take away the Duke, and guard him sure.

GLOUCESTER
Ah, thus King Henry throws away his crutch
Before his legs be firm to bear his body.--
Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side,
And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.
Ah, that my fear were false; ah, that it were!
For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear.
[Gloucester exits, guarded by Cardinal's Men.]

KING HENRY
My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best
Do, or undo, as if ourself were here.

QUEEN MARGARET
What, will your Highness leave the Parliament?

KING HENRY
Ay, Margaret. My heart is drowned with grief,
Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes,
My body round engirt with misery;
For what's more miserable than discontent?
Ah, uncle Humphrey, in thy face I see
The map of honor, truth, and loyalty;
And yet, good Humphrey, is the hour to come
That e'er I proved thee false or feared thy faith.
What louring star now envies thy estate
That these great lords and Margaret our queen
Do seek subversion of thy harmless life?
Thou never didst them wrong nor no man wrong.
And as the butcher takes away the calf
And binds the wretch and beats it when it strains,
Bearing it to the bloody slaughterhouse,
Even so remorseless have they borne him hence;
And as the dam runs lowing up and down,
Looking the way her harmless young one went,
And can do naught but wail her darling's loss,
Even so myself bewails good Gloucester's case
With sad unhelpful tears, and with dimmed eyes
Look after him and cannot do him good,
So mighty are his vowed enemies.
His fortunes I will weep and, 'twixt each groan,
Say "Who's a traitor, Gloucester he is none."
[He exits, with Buckingham, Salisbury, Warwick,
and Others. Somerset steps aside.]

QUEEN MARGARET, [to Cardinal, Suffolk, and York]
Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot
beams.
Henry my lord is cold in great affairs,
Too full of foolish pity; and Gloucester's show
Beguiles him, as the mournful crocodile
With sorrow snares relenting passengers,
Or as the snake, rolled in a flow'ring bank,
With shining checkered slough, doth sting a child
That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I--
And yet herein I judge mine own wit good--
This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world,
To rid us from the fear we have of him.

CARDINAL
That he should die is worthy policy,
But yet we want a color for his death.
'Tis meet he be condemned by course of law.

SUFFOLK
But, in my mind, that were no policy.
The King will labor still to save his life,
The Commons haply rise to save his life,
And yet we have but trivial argument,
More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death.

YORK
So that, by this, you would not have him die.

SUFFOLK
Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I!

YORK
'Tis York that hath more reason for his death.
But, my Lord Cardinal, and you, my lord of Suffolk,
Say as you think, and speak it from your souls:
Were 't not all one an empty eagle were set
To guard the chicken from a hungry kite
As place Duke Humphrey for the King's Protector?

QUEEN MARGARET
So the poor chicken should be sure of death.

SUFFOLK
Madam, 'tis true; and were 't not madness then
To make the fox surveyor of the fold--
Who, being accused a crafty murderer,
His guilt should be but idly posted over
Because his purpose is not executed?
No, let him die in that he is a fox,
By nature proved an enemy to the flock,
Before his chaps be stained with crimson blood,
As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege.
And do not stand on quillets how to slay him--
Be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety,
Sleeping or waking. 'Tis no matter how,
So he be dead; for that is good deceit
Which mates him first that first intends deceit.

QUEEN MARGARET
Thrice noble Suffolk, 'tis resolutely spoke.

SUFFOLK
Not resolute, except so much were done,
For things are often spoke and seldom meant;
But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And to preserve my sovereign from his foe,
Say but the word and I will be his priest.

CARDINAL
But I would have him dead, my lord of Suffolk,
Ere you can take due orders for a priest.
Say you consent and censure well the deed,
And I'll provide his executioner.
I tender so the safety of my liege.

SUFFOLK
Here is my hand. The deed is worthy doing.

QUEEN MARGARET  And so say I.

YORK
And I. And now we three have spoke it,
It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.

[Enter a Post.]


POST
Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain
To signify that rebels there are up
And put the Englishmen unto the sword.
Send succors, lords, and stop the rage betime,
Before the wound do grow uncurable;
For, being green, there is great hope of help.
[He exits.]

CARDINAL
A breach that craves a quick expedient stop!
What counsel give you in this weighty cause?

YORK
That Somerset be sent as regent thither.
'Tis meet that lucky ruler be employed--
Witness the fortune he hath had in France.

SOMERSET, [advancing]
If York, with all his far-fet policy,
Had been the regent there instead of me,
He never would have stayed in France so long.

YORK
No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done.
I rather would have lost my life betimes
Than bring a burden of dishonor home
By staying there so long till all were lost.
Show me one scar charactered on thy skin.
Men's flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.

QUEEN MARGARET
Nay, then, this spark will prove a raging fire
If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with.--
No more, good York.--Sweet Somerset, be still.--
Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there,
Might happily have proved far worse than his.

YORK
What, worse than naught? Nay, then, a shame take
all!

SOMERSET
And, in the number, thee that wishest shame!

CARDINAL
My lord of York, try what your fortune is.
Th' uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms
And temper clay with blood of Englishmen.
To Ireland will you lead a band of men,
Collected choicely, from each county some,
And try your hap against the Irishmen?

YORK
I will, my lord, so please his Majesty.

SUFFOLK
Why, our authority is his consent,
And what we do establish he confirms.
Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.

YORK
I am content. Provide me soldiers, lords,
Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.

SUFFOLK
A charge, Lord York, that I will see performed.
But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.

CARDINAL
No more of him, for I will deal with him,
That henceforth he shall trouble us no more.
And so break off; the day is almost spent.
Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.

YORK
My lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days
At Bristow I expect my soldiers,
For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.

SUFFOLK
I'll see it truly done, my lord of York.
[All but York exit.]

YORK
Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts
And change misdoubt to resolution.
Be that thou hop'st to be, or what thou art
Resign to death; it is not worth th' enjoying.
Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man
And find no harbor in a royal heart.
Faster than springtime showers comes thought on
thought,
And not a thought but thinks on dignity.
My brain, more busy than the laboring spider,
Weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies.
Well, nobles, well, 'tis politicly done
To send me packing with an host of men.
I fear me you but warm the starved snake,
Who, cherished in your breasts, will sting your
hearts.
'Twas men I lacked, and you will give them me;
I take it kindly. Yet be well assured
You put sharp weapons in a madman's hands.
Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band,
I will stir up in England some black storm
Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell;
And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage
Until the golden circuit on my head,
Like to the glorious sun's transparent beams,
Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.
And for a minister of my intent,
I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman,
John Cade of Ashford,
To make commotion, as full well he can,
Under the title of John Mortimer.
In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade
Oppose himself against a troop of kerns,
And fought so long till that his thighs with darts
Were almost like a sharp-quilled porpentine;
And in the end being rescued, I have seen
Him caper upright like a wild Morisco,
Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.
Full often, like a shag-haired crafty kern,
Hath he conversed with the enemy,
And undiscovered come to me again
And given me notice of their villainies.
This devil here shall be my substitute;
For that John Mortimer, which now is dead,
In face, in gait, in speech he doth resemble.
By this, I shall perceive the Commons' mind,
How they affect the house and claim of York.
Say he be taken, racked, and tortured,
I know no pain they can inflict upon him
Will make him say I moved him to those arms.
Say that he thrive, as 'tis great like he will,
Why then from Ireland come I with my strength
And reap the harvest which that rascal sowed.
For, Humphrey being dead, as he shall be,
And Henry put apart, the next for me.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter two or three running over the stage, from the
murder of Duke Humphrey.]


FIRST MURDERER
Run to my lord of Suffolk. Let him know
We have dispatched the Duke as he commanded.

SECOND MURDERER
O, that it were to do! What have we done?
Didst ever hear a man so penitent?

[Enter Suffolk.]


FIRST MURDERER  Here comes my lord.

SUFFOLK  Now, sirs, have you dispatched this thing?

FIRST MURDERER  Ay, my good lord, he's dead.

SUFFOLK
Why, that's well said. Go, get you to my house;
I will reward you for this venturous deed.
The King and all the peers are here at hand.
Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well,
According as I gave directions?

FIRST MURDERER  'Tis, my good lord.

SUFFOLK  Away, be gone.	[The Murderers exit.]

[Sound trumpets. Enter King Henry, Queen
Margaret, Cardinal, Somerset, with Attendants.]


KING HENRY
Go, call our uncle to our presence straight.
Say we intend to try his Grace today
If he be guilty, as 'tis published.

SUFFOLK
I'll call him presently, my noble lord.	[He exits.]

KING HENRY
Lords, take your places; and, I pray you all,
Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle Gloucester
Than from true evidence of good esteem
He be approved in practice culpable.

QUEEN MARGARET
God forbid any malice should prevail
That faultless may condemn a nobleman!
Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion!

KING HENRY
I thank thee, Meg. These words content me much.

[Enter Suffolk.]

How now? Why look'st thou pale? Why tremblest
thou?
Where is our uncle? What's the matter, Suffolk?

SUFFOLK
Dead in his bed, my lord. Gloucester is dead.

QUEEN MARGARET  Marry, God forfend!

CARDINAL
God's secret judgment. I did dream tonight
The Duke was dumb and could not speak a word.
[King Henry swoons.]

QUEEN MARGARET
How fares my lord? Help, lords, the King is dead!

SOMERSET
Rear up his body. Wring him by the nose.

QUEEN MARGARET
Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes!
[King Henry stirs.]

SUFFOLK
He doth revive again. Madam, be patient.

KING HENRY
O heavenly God!

QUEEN MARGARET  How fares my gracious lord?

SUFFOLK
Comfort, my sovereign! Gracious Henry, comfort!

KING HENRY
What, doth my lord of Suffolk comfort me?
Came he right now to sing a raven's note,
Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers,
And thinks he that the chirping of a wren,
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Can chase away the first-conceived sound?
Hide not thy poison with such sugared words.
Lay not thy hands on me. Forbear, I say!
Their touch affrights me as a serpent's sting.
Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight!
Upon thy eyeballs, murderous Tyranny
Sits in grim majesty to fright the world.
Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding.
Yet do not go away. Come, basilisk,
And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight;
For in the shade of death I shall find joy,
In life but double death, now Gloucester's dead.

QUEEN MARGARET
Why do you rate my lord of Suffolk thus?
Although the Duke was enemy to him,
Yet he most Christian-like laments his death.
And for myself, foe as he was to me,
Might liquid tears or heart-offending groans
Or blood-consuming sighs recall his life,
I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans,
Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs,
And all to have the noble duke alive.
What know I how the world may deem of me?
For it is known we were but hollow friends.
It may be judged I made the Duke away;
So shall my name with slander's tongue be wounded
And princes' courts be filled with my reproach.
This get I by his death. Ay me, unhappy,
To be a queen and crowned with infamy!

KING HENRY
Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!

QUEEN MARGARET
Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.
What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face?
I am no loathsome leper. Look on me.
What, art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf?
Be poisonous too, and kill thy forlorn queen.
Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb?
Why, then, Dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy.
Erect his statue and worship it,
And make my image but an alehouse sign.
Was I for this nigh-wracked upon the sea
And twice by awkward wind from England's bank
Drove back again unto my native clime?
What boded this, but well forewarning wind
Did seem to say "Seek not a scorpion's nest,
Nor set no footing on this unkind shore"?
What did I then but cursed the gentle gusts
And he that loosed them forth their brazen caves
And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore
Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock?
Yet Aeolus would not be a murderer,
But left that hateful office unto thee.
The pretty-vaulting sea refused to drown me,
Knowing that thou wouldst have me drowned on
shore
With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness.
The splitting rocks cow'red in the sinking sands
And would not dash me with their ragged sides
Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,
Might in thy palace perish Margaret.
As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs,
When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,
I stood upon the hatches in the storm,
And when the dusky sky began to rob
My earnest-gaping sight of thy land's view,
I took a costly jewel from my neck--
A heart it was, bound in with diamonds--
And threw it towards thy land. The sea received it,
And so I wished thy body might my heart.
And even with this I lost fair England's view,
And bid mine eyes be packing with my heart,
And called them blind and dusky spectacles
For losing ken of Albion's wished coast.
How often have I tempted Suffolk's tongue,
The agent of thy foul inconstancy,
To sit and watch me, as Ascanius did
When he to madding Dido would unfold
His father's acts commenced in burning Troy!
Am I not witched like her, or thou not false like
him?
Ay me, I can no more. Die, Margaret,
For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long.

[Noise within. Enter Warwick and Salisbury,
and many Commons.]


WARWICK
It is reported, mighty sovereign,
That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murdered
By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means.
The Commons, like an angry hive of bees
That want their leader, scatter up and down
And care not who they sting in his revenge.
Myself have calmed their spleenful mutiny,
Until they hear the order of his death.

KING HENRY
That he is dead, good Warwick, 'tis too true;
But how he died God knows, not Henry.
Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse,
And comment then upon his sudden death.

WARWICK
That shall I do, my liege.--Stay, Salisbury,
With the rude multitude till I return.
[Warwick exits through one door; Salisbury and
Commons exit through another.]

KING HENRY
O Thou that judgest all things, stay my thoughts,
My thoughts that labor to persuade my soul
Some violent hands were laid on Humphrey's life.
If my suspect be false, forgive me, God,
For judgment only doth belong to Thee.
Fain would I go to chafe his paly lips
With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain
Upon his face an ocean of salt tears,
To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk
And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling;
But all in vain are these mean obsequies.
And to survey his dead and earthy image,
What were it but to make my sorrow greater?

[Bed put forth, bearing Gloucester's body.
Enter Warwick.]


WARWICK
Come hither, gracious sovereign. View this body.

KING HENRY
That is to see how deep my grave is made,
For with his soul fled all my worldly solace;
For seeing him, I see my life in death.

WARWICK
As surely as my soul intends to live
With that dread King that took our state upon Him
To free us from His Father's wrathful curse,
I do believe that violent hands were laid
Upon the life of this thrice-famed duke.

SUFFOLK
A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue!
What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow?

WARWICK
See how the blood is settled in his face.
Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost,
Of ashy semblance, meager, pale, and bloodless,
Being all descended to the laboring heart,
Who, in the conflict that it holds with death,
Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy,
Which with the heart there cools and ne'er
returneth
To blush and beautify the cheek again.
But see, his face is black and full of blood;
His eyeballs further out than when he lived,
Staring full ghastly, like a strangled man;
His hair upreared, his nostrils stretched with
struggling;
His hands abroad displayed, as one that grasped
And tugged for life and was by strength subdued.
Look, on the sheets his hair, you see, is sticking;
His well-proportioned beard made rough and
rugged,
Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged.
It cannot be but he was murdered here.
The least of all these signs were probable.
[The bed is removed.]

SUFFOLK
Why, Warwick, who should do the Duke to death?
Myself and Beaufort had him in protection,
And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.

WARWICK
But both of you were vowed Duke Humphrey's foes,
[To Cardinal.] And you, forsooth, had the good duke
to keep.
'Tis like you would not feast him like a friend,
And 'tis well seen he found an enemy.

QUEEN MARGARET
Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen
As guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death.

WARWICK
Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh,
And sees fast by a butcher with an ax,
But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter?
Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest
But may imagine how the bird was dead,
Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?
Even so suspicious is this tragedy.

QUEEN MARGARET
Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where's your knife?
Is Beaufort termed a kite? Where are his talons?

SUFFOLK
I wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men,
But here's a vengeful sword, rusted with ease,
That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart
That slanders me with murder's crimson badge.--
Say, if thou dar'st, proud lord of Warwickshire,
That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey's death.

WARWICK
What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?

QUEEN MARGARET
He dares not calm his contumelious spirit
Nor cease to be an arrogant controller,
Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.

WARWICK
Madam, be still--with reverence may I say--
For every word you speak in his behalf
Is slander to your royal dignity.

SUFFOLK
Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanor!
If ever lady wronged her lord so much,
Thy mother took into her blameful bed
Some stern untutored churl, and noble stock
Was graft with crab-tree slip, whose fruit thou art
And never of the Nevilles' noble race.

WARWICK
But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee
And I should rob the deathsman of his fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
And that my sovereign's presence makes me mild,
I would, false murd'rous coward, on thy knee
Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech
And say it was thy mother that thou meant'st,
That thou thyself wast born in bastardy;
And after all this fearful homage done,
Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell,
Pernicious bloodsucker of sleeping men!

SUFFOLK
Thou shalt be waking while I shed thy blood,
If from this presence thou dar'st go with me.

WARWICK
Away even now, or I will drag thee hence!
Unworthy though thou art, I'll cope with thee
And do some service to Duke Humphrey's ghost.
[Warwick and Suffolk exit.]

KING HENRY
What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted?
Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just,
And he but naked, though locked up in steel,
Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.

[A noise within.]

QUEEN MARGARET  What noise is this?

[Enter Suffolk and Warwick, with their weapons drawn.]


KING HENRY
Why, how now, lords? Your wrathful weapons
drawn
Here in our presence? Dare you be so bold?
Why, what tumultuous clamor have we here?

SUFFOLK
The trait'rous Warwick, with the men of Bury,
Set all upon me, mighty sovereign.

[Enter Salisbury.]


SALISBURY, [to the offstage Commons]
Sirs, stand apart. The King shall know your mind.--
Dread lord, the Commons send you word by me,
Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death
Or banished fair England's territories,
They will by violence tear him from your palace
And torture him with grievous ling'ring death.
They say, by him the good duke Humphrey died;
They say, in him they fear your Highness' death;
And mere instinct of love and loyalty,
Free from a stubborn opposite intent,
As being thought to contradict your liking,
Makes them thus forward in his banishment.
They say, in care of your most royal person,
That if your Highness should intend to sleep,
And charge that no man should disturb your rest,
In pain of your dislike or pain of death,
Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict,
Were there a serpent seen with forked tongue
That slyly glided towards your Majesty,
It were but necessary you were waked,
Lest, being suffered in that harmful slumber,
The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal.
And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,
That they will guard you, whe'er you will or no,
From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is,
With whose envenomed and fatal sting
Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth,
They say, is shamefully bereft of life.

COMMONS, [within]
An answer from the King, my lord of Salisbury!

SUFFOLK
'Tis like the Commons, rude unpolished hinds,
Could send such message to their sovereign!
[To Salisbury.] But you, my lord, were glad to be
employed,
To show how quaint an orator you are.
But all the honor Salisbury hath won
Is that he was the lord ambassador
Sent from a sort of tinkers to the King.

COMMONS, [within]
An answer from the King, or we will all break in.

KING HENRY
Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me,
I thank them for their tender loving care;
And, had I not been cited so by them,
Yet did I purpose as they do entreat.
For, sure, my thoughts do hourly prophesy
Mischance unto my state by Suffolk's means.
And therefore, by His Majesty I swear,
Whose far unworthy deputy I am,
He shall not breathe infection in this air
But three days longer, on the pain of death.
[Salisbury exits.]

QUEEN MARGARET
O Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk!

KING HENRY
Ungentle queen to call him gentle Suffolk!
No more, I say. If thou dost plead for him,
Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath.
Had I but said, I would have kept my word;
But when I swear, it is irrevocable.
[To Suffolk.] If, after three days' space, thou here
be'st found
On any ground that I am ruler of,
The world shall not be ransom for thy life.--
Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me.
I have great matters to impart to thee.
[All but the Queen and Suffolk exit.]

QUEEN MARGARET, [calling after King Henry and
Warwick]
Mischance and sorrow go along with you!
Heart's discontent and sour affliction
Be playfellows to keep you company!
There's two of you; the devil make a third,
And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!

SUFFOLK
Cease, gentle queen, these execrations,
And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.

QUEEN MARGARET
Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch!
Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemies?

SUFFOLK
A plague upon them! Wherefore should I curse
them?
Could curses kill, as doth the mandrake's groan,
I would invent as bitter searching terms,
As curst, as harsh, and horrible to hear,
Delivered strongly through my fixed teeth,
With full as many signs of deadly hate,
As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave.
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words;
Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint;
Mine hair be fixed on end, as one distract;
Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban;
And even now my burdened heart would break
Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!
Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste;
Their sweetest shade, a grove of cypress trees;
Their chiefest prospect, murd'ring basilisks;
Their softest touch, as smart as lizards' stings!
Their music, frightful as the serpent's hiss,
And boding screech owls make the consort full!
All the foul terrors in dark-seated hell--

QUEEN MARGARET
Enough, sweet Suffolk, thou torment'st thyself,
And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass,
Or like an over-charged gun, recoil
And turn the force of them upon thyself.

SUFFOLK
You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave?
Now, by the ground that I am banished from,
Well could I curse away a winter's night,
Though standing naked on a mountain top
Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
And think it but a minute spent in sport.

QUEEN MARGARET
O, let me entreat thee cease! Give me thy hand,
That I may dew it with my mournful tears;
Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place
To wash away my woeful monuments.
[She kisses his hand.]
O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,
That thou mightst think upon these by the seal,
Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for
thee!
So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief;
'Tis but surmised whiles thou art standing by,
As one that surfeits thinking on a want.
I will repeal thee, or, be well assured,
Adventure to be banished myself;
And banished I am, if but from thee.
Go, speak not to me. Even now be gone!
O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemned
Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves,
Loather a hundred times to part than die.
[They embrace.]
Yet now farewell, and farewell life with thee.

SUFFOLK
Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished,
Once by the King, and three times thrice by thee.
'Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence.
A wilderness is populous enough,
So Suffolk had thy heavenly company;
For where thou art, there is the world itself,
With every several pleasure in the world;
And where thou art not, desolation.
I can no more. Live thou to joy thy life;
Myself no joy in naught but that thou liv'st.

[Enter Vaux.]


QUEEN MARGARET
Whither goes Vaux so fast? What news, I prithee?

VAUX  To signify unto his Majesty,
That Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death;
For suddenly a grievous sickness took him
That makes him gasp and stare and catch the air,
Blaspheming God and cursing men on Earth.
Sometimes he talks as if Duke Humphrey's ghost
Were by his side; sometimes he calls the King
And whispers to his pillow, as to him,
The secrets of his overcharged soul.
And I am sent to tell his Majesty
That even now he cries aloud for him.

QUEEN MARGARET
Go, tell this heavy message to the King.	[Vaux exits.]
Ay me! What is this world? What news are these!
But wherefore grieve I at an hour's poor loss,
Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure?
Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,
And with the southern clouds contend in tears--
Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my
sorrows'?
Now get thee hence. The King, thou know'st, is
coming;
If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.

SUFFOLK
If I depart from thee, I cannot live;
And in thy sight to die, what were it else
But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
Here could I breathe my soul into the air,
As mild and gentle as the cradle babe
Dying with mother's dug between its lips;
Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad
And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,
To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth.
So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,
Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
And then it lived in sweet Elysium.
To die by thee were but to die in jest;
From thee to die were torture more than death.
O, let me stay, befall what may befall!

QUEEN MARGARET
Away! Though parting be a fretful corrosive,
It is applied to a deathful wound.
To France, sweet Suffolk. Let me hear from thee,
For wheresoe'er thou art in this world's globe,
I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.

SUFFOLK  I go.

QUEEN MARGARET  And take my heart with thee.

SUFFOLK
A jewel locked into the woefull'st cask
That ever did contain a thing of worth!
Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we.
This way fall I to death.

QUEEN MARGARET  This way for me.
[They exit through different doors.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King Henry, Salisbury and Warwick, to the
Cardinal in bed, raving and staring.]


KING HENRY
How fares my lord? Speak, Beaufort, to thy sovereign.

CARDINAL
If thou be'st Death, I'll give thee England's treasure,
Enough to purchase such another island,
So thou wilt let me live and feel no pain.

KING HENRY
Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,
Where Death's approach is seen so terrible!

WARWICK
Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.

CARDINAL
Bring me unto my trial when you will.
Died he not in his bed? Where should he die?
Can I make men live, whe'er they will or no?
O, torture me no more! I will confess.
Alive again? Then show me where he is.
I'll give a thousand pound to look upon him.
He hath no eyes! The dust hath blinded them.
Comb down his hair. Look, look. It stands upright,
Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul.
Give me some drink, and bid the apothecary
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.

KING HENRY
O, Thou eternal mover of the heavens,
Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!
O, beat away the busy meddling fiend
That lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul,
And from his bosom purge this black despair!

WARWICK
See how the pangs of death do make him grin!

SALISBURY
Disturb him not. Let him pass peaceably.

KING HENRY
Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be!--
Lord Card'nal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss,
Hold up thy hand; make signal of thy hope.
[The Cardinal dies.]
He dies and makes no sign. O, God forgive him!

WARWICK
So bad a death argues a monstrous life.

KING HENRY
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
Close up his eyes, and draw the curtain close,
And let us all to meditation.
[After the curtains are closed around
the bed, they exit. The bed is removed.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Alarum. Offstage fight at sea. Ordnance goes off.
Enter Lieutenant, Suffolk, captive and in disguise,
and Others, including a Master, a Master's Mate,
Walter Whitmore, and Prisoners.]


LIEUTENANT
The gaudy, blabbing, and remorseful day
Is crept into the bosom of the sea,
And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades
That drag the tragic melancholy night,
Who, with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings
Clip dead men's graves, and from their misty jaws
Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air.
Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize;
For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,
Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
Or with their blood stain this discolored shore.--
Master, this prisoner freely give I thee.--
And, thou that art his mate, make boot of this.--
The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.
[Three gentlemen prisoners, including Suffolk,
are handed over.]

FIRST GENTLEMAN
What is my ransom, master? Let me know.

MASTER
A thousand crowns, or else lay down your head.

MATE, [to the Second Gentleman]
And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.

LIEUTENANT
What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns,
And bear the name and port of gentlemen?--
Cut both the villains' throats--for die you shall;
The lives of those which we have lost in fight
Be counterpoised with such a petty sum!

FIRST GENTLEMAN
I'll give it, sir, and therefore spare my life.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
And so will I, and write home for it straight.

WHITMORE, [to Suffolk]
I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
And therefore to revenge it shalt thou die;
And so should these, if I might have my will.

LIEUTENANT
Be not so rash. Take ransom; let him live.

SUFFOLK
Look on my George; I am a gentleman.
Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.

WHITMORE
And so am I. My name is Walter Whitmore.
[Suffolk starts.]
How now, why starts thou? What, doth death
affright?

SUFFOLK
Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death.
A cunning man did calculate my birth
And told me that by water I should die.
Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded;
Thy name is Gualtier, being rightly sounded.

WHITMORE
Gualtier or Walter, which it is, I care not.
Never yet did base dishonor blur our name
But with our sword we wiped away the blot.
Therefore, when merchantlike I sell revenge,
Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defaced,
And I proclaimed a coward through the world!

SUFFOLK
Stay, Whitmore, for thy prisoner is a prince,
The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.

WHITMORE
The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags?

SUFFOLK
Ay, but these rags are no part of the Duke.
Jove sometimes went disguised, and why not I?

LIEUTENANT
But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.

SUFFOLK
Obscure and lousy swain, King Henry's blood,
The honorable blood of Lancaster,
Must not be shed by such a jaded groom.
Hast thou not kissed thy hand and held my stirrup?
Bareheaded plodded by my footcloth mule,
And thought thee happy when I shook my head?
How often hast thou waited at my cup,
Fed from my trencher, kneeled down at the board,
When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?
Remember it, and let it make thee crestfall'n,
Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride.
How in our voiding lobby hast thou stood
And duly waited for my coming forth?
This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf,
And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.

WHITMORE
Speak, captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain?

LIEUTENANT
First let my words stab him as he hath me.

SUFFOLK
Base slave, thy words are blunt, and so art thou.

LIEUTENANT
Convey him hence, and on our longboat's side,
Strike off his head.

SUFFOLK  Thou dar'st not for thy own.

LIEUTENANT
Yes, Pole.

SUFFOLK  Pole!

LIEUTENANT  Pole! Sir Pole! Lord!
Ay, kennel, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirt
Troubles the silver spring where England drinks!
Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth
For swallowing the treasure of the realm.
Thy lips that kissed the Queen shall sweep the
ground,
And thou that smiledst at good Duke Humphrey's
death
Against the senseless winds shall grin in vain,
Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again.
And wedded be thou to the hags of hell
For daring to affy a mighty lord
Unto the daughter of a worthless king,
Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem.
By devilish policy art thou grown great,
And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorged
With gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart.
By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France.
The false revolting Normans thorough thee
Disdain to call us lord, and Picardy
Hath slain their governors, surprised our forts,
And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home.
The princely Warwick, and the Nevilles all,
Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,
As hating thee, are rising up in arms.
And now the house of York, thrust from the crown
By shameful murder of a guiltless king
And lofty, proud, encroaching tyranny,
Burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful colors
Advance our half-faced sun, striving to shine,
Under the which is writ "Invitis nubibus."
The commons here in Kent are up in arms,
And, to conclude, reproach and beggary
Is crept into the palace of our king,
And all by thee.--Away! Convey him hence.

SUFFOLK
O, that I were a god, to shoot forth thunder
Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!
Small things make base men proud. This villain
here,
Being captain of a pinnace, threatens more
Than Bargulus, the strong Illyrian pirate.
Drones suck not eagles' blood, but rob beehives.
It is impossible that I should die
By such a lowly vassal as thyself.
Thy words move rage and not remorse in me.
I go of message from the Queen to France.
I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.

LIEUTENANT  Walter.

WHITMORE
Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.

SUFFOLK
Paene gelidus timor occupat artus.
It is thee I fear.

WHITMORE
Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.
What, are you daunted now? Now will you stoop?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
My gracious lord, entreat him; speak him fair.

SUFFOLK
Suffolk's imperial tongue is stern and rough,
Used to command, untaught to plead for favor.
Far be it we should honor such as these
With humble suit. No, rather let my head
Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any
Save to the God of heaven and to my king;
And sooner dance upon a bloody pole
Than stand uncovered to the vulgar groom.
True nobility is exempt from fear.--
More can I bear than you dare execute.

LIEUTENANT
Hale him away, and let him talk no more.

SUFFOLK
Come, soldiers, show what cruelty you can,
That this my death may never be forgot!
Great men oft die by vile bezonians:
A Roman sworder and banditto slave
Murdered sweet Tully; Brutus' bastard hand
Stabbed Julius Caesar; savage islanders
Pompey the Great, and Suffolk dies by pirates.
[Walter Whitmore exits with
Suffolk and Others.]

LIEUTENANT
And as for these whose ransom we have set,
It is our pleasure one of them depart.
[To Second Gentleman.] Therefore come you with us,
and let him go.	[Lieutenant and the rest exit.
The First Gentleman remains.]

[Enter Walter Whitmore with the body
and severed head of Suffolk.]


WHITMORE
There let his head and lifeless body lie,
Until the Queen his mistress bury it.
[Walter Whitmore exits.]

FIRST GENTLEMAN
O, barbarous and bloody spectacle!
His body will I bear unto the King.
If he revenge it not, yet will his friends.
So will the Queen, that living held him dear.
[He exits with the head and body.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Bevis and John Holland with staves.]


BEVIS  Come, and get thee a sword, though made of a
lath. They have been up these two days.

HOLLAND  They have the more need to sleep now, then.

BEVIS  I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dress
the commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap
upon it.

HOLLAND  So he had need, for 'tis threadbare. Well, I
say, it was never merry world in England since
gentlemen came up.

BEVIS  O miserable age! Virtue is not regarded in
handicraftsmen.

HOLLAND  The nobility think scorn to go in leather
aprons.

BEVIS  Nay, more, the King's Council are no good
workmen.

HOLLAND  True, and yet it is said "Labor in thy vocation,"
which is as much to say as "Let the magistrates
be laboring men." And therefore should we
be magistrates.

BEVIS  Thou hast hit it, for there's no better sign of a
brave mind than a hard hand.

HOLLAND  I see them, I see them! There's Best's son, the
tanner of Wingham--

BEVIS  He shall have the skins of our enemies to make
dog's leather of.

HOLLAND  And Dick the butcher--

BEVIS  Then is sin struck down like an ox, and iniquity's
throat cut like a calf.

HOLLAND  And Smith the weaver.

BEVIS  Argo, their thread of life is spun.

HOLLAND  Come, come, let's fall in with them.

[Drum. Enter Cade, Dick the butcher, Smith the
weaver, and a Sawyer, with infinite numbers,
all with staves.]


CADE  We, John Cade, so termed of our supposed
father--

DICK, [aside]  Or rather of stealing a cade of herrings.

CADE  For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired
with the spirit of putting down kings and princes--
command silence.

DICK  Silence!

CADE  My father was a Mortimer--

DICK, [aside]  He was an honest man and a good
bricklayer.

CADE  My mother a Plantagenet--

DICK, [aside]  I knew her well; she was a midwife.

CADE  My wife descended of the Lacys.

DICK, [aside]  She was indeed a peddler's daughter, and
sold many laces.

SMITH, [aside]  But now of late, not able to travel with
her furred pack, she washes bucks here at home.

CADE  Therefore am I of an honorable house.

DICK, [aside]  Ay, by my faith, the field is honorable;
and there was he born, under a hedge, for his
father had never a house but the cage.

CADE  Valiant I am--

SMITH, [aside]  He must needs, for beggary is valiant.

CADE  I am able to endure much--

DICK, [aside]  No question of that; for I have seen him
whipped three market-days together.

CADE  I fear neither sword nor fire.

SMITH, [aside]  He need not fear the sword, for his coat
is of proof.

DICK, [aside]  But methinks he should stand in fear of
fire, being burnt i' th' hand for stealing of sheep.

CADE  Be brave, then, for your captain is brave and
vows reformation. There shall be in England seven
halfpenny loaves sold for a penny. The three-hooped
pot shall have ten hoops, and I will make it
felony to drink small beer. All the realm shall be in
common, and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to
grass. And when I am king, as king I will be--

ALL  God save your Majesty!

CADE  I thank you, good people.--There shall be no
money; all shall eat and drink on my score; and I
will apparel them all in one livery, that they may
agree like brothers and worship me their lord.

DICK  The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.

CADE  Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable
thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb should
be made parchment? That parchment, being scribbled
o'er, should undo a man? Some say the bee
stings, but I say, 'tis the beeswax; for I did but seal
once to a thing, and I was never mine own man
since. How now? Who's there?

[Enter a Clerk of Chartham, under guard.]


SMITH  The clerk of Chartham. He can write and read
and cast account.

CADE  O, monstrous!

SMITH  We took him setting of boys' copies.

CADE  Here's a villain!

SMITH  H'as a book in his pocket with red letters in 't.

CADE  Nay, then, he is a conjurer.

DICK  Nay, he can make obligations and write court
hand.

CADE  I am sorry for 't. The man is a proper man, of
mine honor. Unless I find him guilty, he shall not
die.--Come hither, sirrah; I must examine thee.
What is thy name?

CLERK  Emmanuel.

DICK  They use to write it on the top of letters.--'Twill
go hard with you.

CADE  Let me alone.--Dost thou use to write thy
name? Or hast thou a mark to thyself, like an
honest, plain-dealing man?

CLERK  Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought
up that I can write my name.

ALL  He hath confessed. Away with him! He's a villain
and a traitor.

CADE  Away with him, I say! Hang him with his pen
and inkhorn about his neck.
[One exits with the Clerk.]

[Enter Michael.]


MICHAEL  Where's our general?

CADE  Here I am, thou particular fellow.

MICHAEL  Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his
brother are hard by, with the King's forces.

CADE  Stand, villain, stand, or I'll fell thee down. He
shall be encountered with a man as good as himself.
He is but a knight, is he?

MICHAEL  No.

CADE  To equal him I will make myself a knight
presently. [He kneels.] Rise up Sir John Mortimer.
[He rises.] Now have at him!

[Enter Sir Humphrey Stafford and his Brother, with
a Herald, Drum, and Soldiers.]


STAFFORD
Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
Marked for the gallows, lay your weapons down!
Home to your cottages; forsake this groom.
The King is merciful, if you revolt.

BROTHER
But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood,
If you go forward. Therefore yield, or die.

CADE
As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not.
It is to you, good people, that I speak,
Over whom, in time to come, I hope to reign,
For I am rightful heir unto the crown.

STAFFORD
Villain, thy father was a plasterer,
And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not?

CADE
And Adam was a gardener.

BROTHER  And what of that?

CADE
Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March,
Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not?

STAFFORD  Ay, sir.

CADE
By her he had two children at one birth.

BROTHER  That's false.

CADE
Ay, there's the question. But I say 'tis true.
The elder of them, being put to nurse,
Was by a beggar-woman stol'n away,
And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,
Became a bricklayer when he came to age.
His son am I. Deny it if you can.

DICK
Nay, 'tis too true. Therefore he shall be king.

SMITH  Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house,
and the bricks are alive at this day to testify it.
Therefore deny it not.

STAFFORD
And will you credit this base drudge's words,
That speaks he knows not what?

ALL
Ay, marry, will we. Therefore get you gone.

BROTHER
Jack Cade, the Duke of York hath taught you this.

CADE  He lies, [aside] for I invented it myself.--Go to,
sirrah. Tell the King from me that, for his father's
sake, Henry the Fifth, in whose time boys went to
span-counter for French crowns, I am content he
shall reign, but I'll be Protector over him.

DICK  And, furthermore, we'll have the Lord Saye's
head for selling the dukedom of Maine.

CADE  And good reason: for thereby is England mained
and fain to go with a staff, but that my puissance
holds it up. Fellow kings, I tell you that that Lord
Saye hath gelded the commonwealth and made it
an eunuch; and, more than that, he can speak
French, and therefore he is a traitor.

STAFFORD
O, gross and miserable ignorance!

CADE  Nay, answer if you can. The Frenchmen are our
enemies. Go to, then, I ask but this: can he that
speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good
counselor, or no?

ALL  No, no, and therefore we'll have his head!

BROTHER, [to Stafford]
Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,
Assail them with the army of the King.

STAFFORD
Herald, away, and throughout every town
Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade,
That those which fly before the battle ends
May, even in their wives' and children's sight
Be hanged up for example at their doors.--
And you that be the King's friends, follow me.
[The Staffords, Soldiers, and Herald exit.]

CADE
And you that love the Commons, follow me.
Now show yourselves men. 'Tis for liberty!
We will not leave one lord, one gentleman;
Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon,
For they are thrifty, honest men and such
As would, but that they dare not, take our parts.

DICK  They are all in order and march toward us.

CADE  But then are we in order when we are most out
of order. Come, march forward.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Alarums to the fight, wherein both the Staffords are
slain. Enter Cade and the rest.]


CADE  Where's Dick, the butcher of Ashford?

DICK  Here, sir.

CADE  They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and
thou behaved'st thyself as if thou hadst been in
thine own slaughterhouse. Therefore, thus will I
reward thee: the Lent shall be as long again as it is,
and thou shalt have a license to kill for a hundred
lacking one.

DICK  I desire no more.

CADE  And to speak truth, thou deserv'st no less. This
monument of the victory will I bear. [He puts on
Sir Humphrey Stafford's armor and helmet, or sallet.]
And the bodies shall be dragged at my horse
heels till I do come to London, where we will have
the Mayor's sword borne before us.

DICK  If we mean to thrive and do good, break open
the jails and let out the prisoners.

CADE  Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let's march
towards London.
[They exit with the bodies of the Staffords.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter King Henry, with a supplication, and
Queen Margaret with Suffolk's head, the Duke
of Buckingham, and the Lord Saye.]


QUEEN MARGARET, [aside]
Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind
And makes it fearful and degenerate.
Think therefore on revenge, and cease to weep.
But who can cease to weep and look on this?
Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast,
But where's the body that I should embrace?

BUCKINGHAM, [to King Henry]
What answer makes your Grace to the rebels'
supplication?

KING HENRY
I'll send some holy bishop to entreat,
For God forbid so many simple souls
Should perish by the sword! And I myself,
Rather than bloody war shall cut them short,
Will parley with Jack Cade, their general.
But stay, I'll read it over once again.	[He reads.]

QUEEN MARGARET, [aside]
Ah, barbarous villains! Hath this lovely face
Ruled, like a wandering planet, over me,
And could it not enforce them to relent
That were unworthy to behold the same?

KING HENRY
Lord Saye, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head.

SAYE
Ay, but I hope your Highness shall have his.

KING HENRY  How now, madam?
Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk's death?
I fear me, love, if that I had been dead,
Thou wouldst not have mourned so much for me.

QUEEN MARGARET
No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.

[Enter a Messenger.]


KING HENRY
How now, what news? Why com'st thou in such
haste?

MESSENGER
The rebels are in Southwark. Fly, my lord!
Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke of Clarence' house,
And calls your Grace usurper, openly,
And vows to crown himself in Westminster.
His army is a ragged multitude
Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless.
Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother's death
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed.
All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen
They call false caterpillars and intend their death.

KING HENRY
O, graceless men, they know not what they do!

BUCKINGHAM
My gracious lord, retire to Killingworth
Until a power be raised to put them down.

QUEEN MARGARET
Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
These Kentish rebels would be soon appeased!

KING HENRY  Lord Saye, the traitors hateth thee;
Therefore away with us to Killingworth.

SAYE
So might your Grace's person be in danger.
The sight of me is odious in their eyes;
And therefore in this city will I stay
And live alone as secret as I may.

[Enter another Messenger.]


SECOND MESSENGER
Jack Cade hath gotten London Bridge.
The citizens fly and forsake their houses.
The rascal people, thirsting after prey,
Join with the traitor, and they jointly swear
To spoil the city and your royal court.

BUCKINGHAM
Then linger not, my lord. Away! Take horse!

KING HENRY
Come, Margaret. God, our hope, will succor us.

QUEEN MARGARET
My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceased.

KING HENRY, [to Saye]
Farewell, my lord. Trust not the Kentish rebels.

BUCKINGHAM
Trust nobody, for fear you be betrayed.

SAYE
The trust I have is in mine innocence,
And therefore am I bold and resolute.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Lord Scales upon the Tower, walking. Then enters
two or three Citizens below.]


SCALES  How now? Is Jack Cade slain?

FIRST CITIZEN  No, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for
they have won the Bridge, killing all those that
withstand them. The Lord Mayor craves aid of
your Honor from the Tower to defend the city
from the rebels.

SCALES
Such aid as I can spare you shall command;
But I am troubled here with them myself:
The rebels have essayed to win the Tower.
But get you to Smithfield and gather head,
And thither I will send you Matthew Gough.
Fight for your king, your country, and your lives.
And so farewell, for I must hence again.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Jack Cade and the rest, and strikes his staff on
London Stone.]


CADE  Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting
upon London Stone, I charge and command
that, of the city's cost, the Pissing Conduit run
nothing but claret wine this first year of our reign.
And now henceforward it shall be treason for any
that calls me other than Lord Mortimer.

[Enter a Soldier running.]


SOLDIER  Jack Cade, Jack Cade!

CADE  Knock him down there.	[They kill him.]

DICK  If this fellow be wise, he'll never call you Jack
Cade more. I think he hath a very fair warning.
[Takes a paper from the dead Soldier and
reads the message.]
My lord, there's an army gathered together in
Smithfield.

CADE  Come, then, let's go fight with them. But first, go
and set London Bridge on fire, and, if you can,
burn down the Tower too. Come, let's away.
[All exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Alarums. Matthew Gough is slain, and all the rest.
Then enter Jack Cade with his company.]


CADE  So, sirs. Now go some and pull down the Savoy;
others to th' Inns of Court. Down with them all!

DICK  I have a suit unto your Lordship.

CADE  Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.

DICK  Only that the laws of England may come out of
your mouth.

HOLLAND, [aside]  Mass, 'twill be sore law, then, for he
was thrust in the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not
whole yet.

SMITH, [aside]  Nay, John, it will be stinking law, for
his breath stinks with eating toasted cheese.

CADE  I have thought upon it; it shall be so. Away!
Burn all the records of the realm. My mouth shall
be the Parliament of England.

HOLLAND, [aside]  Then we are like to have biting
statutes--unless his teeth be pulled out.

CADE  And henceforward all things shall be in
common.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  My lord, a prize, a prize! Here's the Lord
Saye, which sold the towns in France, he that
made us pay one-and-twenty fifteens, and one
shilling to the pound, the last subsidy.

[Enter George with the Lord Saye.]


CADE  Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times.--Ah,
thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord, now
art thou within point-blank of our jurisdiction
regal. What canst thou answer to my Majesty for
giving up of Normandy unto Monsieur Basimecu,
the Dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by
these presence, even the presence of Lord Mortimer,
that I am the besom that must sweep the
court clean of such filth as thou art. Thou hast
most traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm
in erecting a grammar school; and whereas,
before, our forefathers had no other books but the
score and the tally, thou hast caused printing to be
used, and, contrary to the King his crown and dignity,
thou hast built a paper mill. It will be proved
to thy face that thou hast men about thee that usually
talk of a noun and a verb and such abominable
words as no Christian ear can endure to hear.
Thou hast appointed justices of peace to call poor
men before them about matters they were not able
to answer. Moreover, thou hast put them in prison;
and, because they could not read, thou hast
hanged them, when indeed only for that cause
they have been most worthy to live. Thou dost ride
on a footcloth, dost thou not?

SAYE  What of that?

CADE  Marry, thou oughtst not to let thy horse wear a
cloak when honester men than thou go in their
hose and doublets.

DICK  And work in their shirt too--as myself, for example,
that am a butcher.

SAYE  You men of Kent--

DICK  What say you of Kent?

SAYE  Nothing but this: 'tis bona terra, mala gens.

CADE  Away with him, away with him! He speaks
Latin.

SAYE
Hear me but speak, and bear me where you will.
Kent, in the commentaries Caesar writ,
Is termed the civil'st place of all this isle.
Sweet is the country, because full of riches;
The people liberal, valiant, active, wealthy;
Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.
I sold not Maine; I lost not Normandy;
Yet to recover them would lose my life.
Justice with favor have I always done;
Prayers and tears have moved me; gifts could never.
When have I aught exacted at your hands
Kent to maintain, the King, the realm, and you?
Large gifts have I bestowed on learned clerks,
Because my book preferred me to the King.
And seeing ignorance is the curse of God,
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven,
Unless you be possessed with devilish spirits,
You cannot but forbear to murder me.
This tongue hath parleyed unto foreign kings
For your behoof--

CADE  Tut, when struck'st thou one blow in the field?

SAYE
Great men have reaching hands. Oft have I struck
Those that I never saw, and struck them dead.

GEORGE  O monstrous coward! What, to come behind
folks?

SAYE
These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.

CADE  Give him a box o' th' ear, and that will make 'em
red again.

SAYE
Long sitting to determine poor men's causes
Hath made me full of sickness and diseases.

CADE  You shall have a hempen caudle, then, and
the help of hatchet.

DICK  Why dost thou quiver, man?

SAYE  The palsy, and not fear, provokes me.

CADE  Nay, he nods at us, as who should say "I'll be
even with you." I'll see if his head will stand steadier
on a pole, or no. Take him away, and behead
him.

SAYE
Tell me, wherein have I offended most?
Have I affected wealth or honor? Speak.
Are my chests filled up with extorted gold?
Is my apparel sumptuous to behold?
Whom have I injured, that you seek my death?
These hands are free from guiltless blood-shedding,
This breast from harboring foul deceitful thoughts.
O, let me live!

CADE  I feel remorse in myself with his words, but I'll
bridle it. He shall die, an it be but for pleading so
well for his life. Away with him! He has a familiar
under his tongue; he speaks not i' God's name. Go,
take him away, I say, and strike off his head
presently; and then break into his son-in-law's
house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head;
and bring them both upon two poles hither.

ALL  It shall be done.

SAYE
Ah, countrymen, if when you make your prayers,
God should be so obdurate as yourselves,
How would it fare with your departed souls?
And therefore yet relent, and save my life.

CADE  Away with him, and do as I command you.
[Some exit with Lord Saye.]
The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a
head on his shoulders unless he pay me tribute.
There shall not a maid be married but she shall
pay to me her maidenhead ere they have it. Men
shall hold of me in capite; and we charge and command
that their wives be as free as heart can wish
or tongue can tell.

DICK  My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside and take
up commodities upon our bills?

CADE  Marry, presently.

ALL  O, brave!

[Enter one with the heads of Lord Saye and Sir James
Cromer on poles.]


CADE  But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another,
for they loved well when they were alive. [The
heads are brought together.] Now part them again,
lest they consult about the giving up of some more
towns in France. Soldiers, defer the spoil of the
city until night, for, with these borne before us
instead of maces, will we ride through the streets
and at every corner have them kiss. Away!
[He exits with his company.]

Scene 8
=======
[Alarum, and retreat. Enter again Cade and
all his rabblement.]


CADE  Up Fish Street! Down Saint Magnus' Corner!
Kill and knock down! Throw them into Thames!
[Sound a parley.]
What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold to
sound retreat or parley when I command them
kill?

[Enter Buckingham and old Clifford with Attendants.]


BUCKINGHAM
Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee.
Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the King
Unto the Commons, whom thou hast misled,
And here pronounce free pardon to them all
That will forsake thee and go home in peace.

CLIFFORD
What say you, countrymen? Will you relent
And yield to mercy whil'st 'tis offered you,
Or let a rabble lead you to your deaths?
Who loves the King and will embrace his pardon,
Fling up his cap and say "God save his Majesty!"
Who hateth him and honors not his father,
Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at us and pass by.

ALL  God save the King! God save the King!
[They fling their caps in the air.]

CADE  What, Buckingham and Clifford, are you so
brave?--And, you base peasants, do you believe
him? Will you needs be hanged with your pardons
about your necks? Hath my sword therefore broke
through London gates, that you should leave me at
the White Hart in Southwark? I thought you
would never have given out these arms till you had
recovered your ancient freedom. But you are all
recreants and dastards, and delight to live in slavery
to the nobility. Let them break your backs with
burdens, take your houses over your heads, ravish
your wives and daughters before your faces. For
me, I will make shift for one, and so God's curse
light upon you all!

ALL  We'll follow Cade! We'll follow Cade!

CLIFFORD  Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth,
That thus you do exclaim you'll go with him?
Will he conduct you through the heart of France
And make the meanest of you earls and dukes?
Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly to,
Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil,
Unless by robbing of your friends and us.
Were 't not a shame that, whilst you live at jar,
The fearful French, whom you late vanquished,
Should make a start o'er seas and vanquish you?
Methinks already in this civil broil
I see them lording it in London streets,
Crying "Villiago!" unto all they meet.
Better ten thousand baseborn Cades miscarry
Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman's mercy.
To France, to France, and get what you have lost!
Spare England, for it is your native coast.
Henry hath money; you are strong and manly.
God on our side, doubt not of victory.

ALL
A Clifford! A Clifford! We'll follow the King and
Clifford!

CADE, [aside]  Was ever feather so lightly blown to and
fro as this multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth
hales them to an hundred mischiefs and makes
them leave me desolate. I see them lay their heads
together to surprise me. My sword make way for
me, for here is no staying!--In despite of the devils
and hell, have through the very middest of you!
And heavens and honor be witness that no want of
resolution in me, but only my followers' base and
ignominious treasons, makes me betake me to my
heels.	[He exits, running.]

BUCKINGHAM
What, is he fled? Go, some, and follow him;
And he that brings his head unto the King
Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward.
[Some of them exit.]
Follow me, soldiers. We'll devise a means
To reconcile you all unto the King.
[All exit.]

Scene 9
=======
[Sound trumpets. Enter King Henry, Queen Margaret,
and Somerset on the terrace, aloft.]


KING HENRY
Was ever king that joyed an earthly throne
And could command no more content than I?
No sooner was I crept out of my cradle
But I was made a king at nine months old.
Was never subject longed to be a king
As I do long and wish to be a subject!

[Enter Buckingham and old Clifford.]


BUCKINGHAM
Health and glad tidings to your Majesty!

KING HENRY
Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surprised,
Or is he but retired to make him strong?

[Enter below multitudes with halters about their necks.]


CLIFFORD
He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield
And, humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
Expect your Highness' doom of life or death.

KING HENRY
Then, heaven, set ope thy everlasting gates
To entertain my vows of thanks and praise!
Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives
And showed how well you love your prince and
country.
Continue still in this so good a mind,
And Henry, though he be infortunate,
Assure yourselves, will never be unkind.
And so with thanks and pardon to you all,
I do dismiss you to your several countries.

ALL  God save the King! God save the King!
[The multitudes exit.]

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
Please it your Grace to be advertised
The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland
And, with a puissant and a mighty power
Of gallowglasses and stout kerns,
Is marching hitherward in proud array,
And still proclaimeth, as he comes along,
His arms are only to remove from thee
The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms a traitor.

KING HENRY
Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York
distressed,
Like to a ship that, having scaped a tempest,
Is straightway calmed and boarded with a pirate.
But now is Cade driven back, his men dispersed,
And now is York in arms to second him.
I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him,
And ask him what's the reason of these arms.
Tell him I'll send Duke Edmund to the Tower.--
And, Somerset, we will commit thee thither
Until his army be dismissed from him.

SOMERSET  My lord,
I'll yield myself to prison willingly,
Or unto death, to do my country good.

KING HENRY, [to Buckingham]
In any case, be not too rough in terms,
For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language.

BUCKINGHAM
I will, my lord, and doubt not so to deal
As all things shall redound unto your good.

KING HENRY
Come, wife, let's in, and learn to govern better,
For yet may England curse my wretched reign.
[Flourish. They exit.]

Scene 10
========
[Enter Cade.]


CADE  Fie on ambitions! Fie on myself, that have a
sword and yet am ready to famish! These five days
have I hid me in these woods and durst not peep
out, for all the country is laid for me. But now am
I so hungry that, if I might have a lease of my life
for a thousand years, I could stay no longer.
Wherefore, o'er a brick wall have I climbed into
this garden, to see if I can eat grass, or pick a sallet
another while, which is not amiss to cool a man's
stomach this hot weather. And I think this word
sallet was born to do me good; for many a time,
but for a sallet, my brainpan had been cleft with a
brown bill; and many a time, when I have been dry
and bravely marching, it hath served me instead of
a quart pot to drink in; and now the word sallet
must serve me to feed on.

[Enter Iden and his Men.]


IDEN
Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
This small inheritance my father left me
Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy.
I seek not to wax great by others' waning,
Or gather wealth, I care not with what envy.
Sufficeth that I have maintains my state
And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.

CADE, [aside]  Here's the lord of the soil come to seize
me for a stray, for entering his fee-simple without
leave.--Ah, villain, thou wilt betray me and get a
thousand crowns of the King by carrying my head
to him; but I'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich
and swallow my sword like a great pin, ere thou
and I part.	[He draws his sword.]

IDEN
Why, rude companion, whatsoe'er thou be,
I know thee not. Why, then, should I betray thee?
Is 't not enough to break into my garden
And, like a thief, to come to rob my grounds,
Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner,
But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?

CADE  Brave thee? Ay, by the best blood that ever was
broached, and beard thee too. Look on me well: I
have eat no meat these five days, yet come thou
and thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as
dead as a doornail, I pray God I may never eat
grass more.

IDEN
Nay, it shall ne'er be said, while England stands,
That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent,
Took odds to combat a poor famished man.
Oppose thy steadfast gazing eyes to mine;
See if thou canst outface me with thy looks.
Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser;
Thy hand is but a finger to my fist,
Thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon.
My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast;
And if mine arm be heaved in the air,
Thy grave is digged already in the earth.
As for words, whose greatness answers words,
Let this my sword report what speech forbears.
[He draws his sword.]

CADE  By my valor, the most complete champion that
ever I heard! Steel, if thou turn the edge or cut not
out the burly-boned clown in chines of beef ere
thou sleep in thy sheath, I beseech God on my
knees thou mayst be turned to hobnails.
[Here they fight, and Cade falls.]
O, I am slain! Famine, and no other, hath slain me.
Let ten thousand devils come against me, and give
me but the ten meals I have lost, and I'd defy them
all. Wither, garden, and be henceforth a burying
place to all that do dwell in this house, because the
unconquered soul of Cade is fled.

IDEN
Is 't Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor?
Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed,
And hang thee o'er my tomb when I am dead.
Ne'er shall this blood be wiped from thy point,
But thou shalt wear it as a herald's coat
To emblaze the honor that thy master got.

CADE  Iden, farewell, and be proud of thy victory. Tell
Kent from me she hath lost her best man, and
exhort all the world to be cowards; for I, that never
feared any, am vanquished by famine, not by valor.
[Dies.]

IDEN
How much thou wrong'st me, heaven be my judge!
Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee!
And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels
Unto a dunghill, which shall be thy grave,
And there cut off thy most ungracious head,
Which I will bear in triumph to the King,
Leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon.
[He exits with his Men, dragging Cade's body.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter York, wearing the white rose, and his army of
Irish, with Attendants, Drum and Colors.]


YORK
From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right
And pluck the crown from feeble Henry's head.
Ring, bells, aloud! Burn, bonfires, clear and bright
To entertain great England's lawful king!
Ah, sancta maiestas, who would not buy thee dear?
Let them obey that knows not how to rule.
This hand was made to handle naught but gold.
I cannot give due action to my words
Except a sword or scepter balance it.
A scepter shall it have, have I a soul,
On which I'll toss the fleur-de-luce of France.

[Enter Buckingham, wearing the red rose.]

[Aside.] Whom have we here? Buckingham, to
disturb me?
The King hath sent him, sure. I must dissemble.

BUCKINGHAM
York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.

YORK
Humphrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure?

BUCKINGHAM
A messenger from Henry, our dread liege,
To know the reason of these arms in peace;
Or why thou, being a subject as I am,
Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn,
Should raise so great a power without his leave,
Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.

YORK, [aside]
Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great.
O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint,
I am so angry at these abject terms!
And now, like Ajax Telamonius,
On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury.
I am far better born than is the King,
More like a king, more kingly in my thoughts.
But I must make fair weather yet awhile,
Till Henry be more weak and I more strong.--
Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me,
That I have given no answer all this while.
My mind was troubled with deep melancholy.
The cause why I have brought this army hither
Is to remove proud Somerset from the King,
Seditious to his Grace and to the state.

BUCKINGHAM
That is too much presumption on thy part.
But if thy arms be to no other end,
The King hath yielded unto thy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.

YORK
Upon thine honor, is he prisoner?

BUCKINGHAM
Upon mine honor, he is prisoner.

YORK
Then, Buckingham, I do dismiss my powers.--
Soldiers, I thank you all. Disperse yourselves.
Meet me tomorrow in Saint George's field;
You shall have pay and everything you wish.
[Soldiers exit.]
And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons,
As pledges of my fealty and love;
I'll send them all as willing as I live.
Lands, goods, horse, armor, anything I have
Is his to use, so Somerset may die.

BUCKINGHAM
York, I commend this kind submission.
We twain will go into his Highness' tent.
[They walk arm in arm.]

[Enter King Henry and Attendants.]


KING HENRY
Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us
That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?

YORK
In all submission and humility
York doth present himself unto your Highness.

KING HENRY
Then what intends these forces thou dost bring?

YORK
To heave the traitor Somerset from hence
And fight against that monstrous rebel Cade,
Who since I heard to be discomfited.

[Enter Iden, with Cade's head.]


IDEN
If one so rude and of so mean condition
May pass into the presence of a king,
Lo, I present your Grace a traitor's head,
The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.

KING HENRY
The head of Cade? Great God, how just art Thou!
O, let me view his visage, being dead,
That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him?

IDEN  I was, an 't like your Majesty.

KING HENRY
How art thou called? And what is thy degree?

IDEN
Alexander Iden, that's my name,
A poor esquire of Kent that loves his king.

BUCKINGHAM
So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amiss
He were created knight for his good service.

KING HENRY
Iden, kneel down. [He kneels.] Rise up a knight. [He
rises.]
We give thee for reward a thousand marks,
And will that thou henceforth attend on us.

IDEN
May Iden live to merit such a bounty,
And never live but true unto his liege!

[Enter Queen Margaret and Somerset,
wearing the red rose.]


KING HENRY, [aside to Buckingham]
See, Buckingham, Somerset comes with th' Queen.
Go bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.
[Buckingham whispers to the Queen.]

QUEEN MARGARET
For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head,
But boldly stand and front him to his face.

YORK, [aside]
How now? Is Somerset at liberty?
Then, York, unloose thy long-imprisoned thoughts,
And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.
Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?--
False king, why hast thou broken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I can brook abuse?
"King" did I call thee? No, thou art not king,
Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,
Which dar'st not--no, nor canst not--rule a traitor.
That head of thine doth not become a crown;
Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer's staff,
And not to grace an awful princely scepter.
That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,
Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear,
Is able with the change to kill and cure.
Here is a hand to hold a scepter up
And with the same to act controlling laws.
Give place. By heaven, thou shalt rule no more
O'er him whom heaven created for thy ruler.

SOMERSET
O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York,
Of capital treason 'gainst the King and crown.
Obey, audacious traitor. Kneel for grace.

YORK
Wouldst have me kneel? First let me ask of these
If they can brook I bow a knee to man.
[To an Attendant.] Sirrah, call in my sons to be my
bail.	[Attendant exits.]
I know, ere they will have me go to ward,
They'll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.

QUEEN MARGARET, [to Buckingham]
Call hither Clifford; bid him come amain,
To say if that the bastard boys of York
Shall be the surety for their traitor father.
[Buckingham exits.]

YORK, [to Queen Margaret]
O, blood-bespotted Neapolitan,
Outcast of Naples, England's bloody scourge!
The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
Shall be their father's bail, and bane to those
That for my surety will refuse the boys.

[Enter York's sons Edward and Richard,
wearing the white rose.]

See where they come; I'll warrant they'll make it
good.

[Enter old Clifford and his Son, wearing the red rose.]


QUEEN MARGARET
And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.

CLIFFORD, [kneeling before King Henry]
Health and all happiness to my lord the King.
[He rises.]

YORK
I thank thee, Clifford. Say, what news with thee?
Nay, do not fright us with an angry look.
We are thy sovereign, Clifford; kneel again.
For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee.

CLIFFORD
This is my king, York; I do not mistake,
But thou mistakes me much to think I do.--
To Bedlam with him! Is the man grown mad?

KING HENRY
Ay, Clifford, a bedlam and ambitious humor
Makes him oppose himself against his king.

CLIFFORD
He is a traitor. Let him to the Tower,
And chop away that factious pate of his.

QUEEN MARGARET
He is arrested, but will not obey.
His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.

YORK  Will you not, sons?

EDWARD
Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.

RICHARD
And if words will not, then our weapons shall.

CLIFFORD
Why, what a brood of traitors have we here!

YORK
Look in a glass, and call thy image so.
I am thy king and thou a false-heart traitor.
Call hither to the stake my two brave bears,
That, with the very shaking of their chains,
They may astonish these fell-lurking curs.
[To an Attendant.] Bid Salisbury and Warwick come
to me.	[Attendant exits.]

[Enter the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, wearing the
white rose.]


CLIFFORD
Are these thy bears? We'll bait thy bears to death
And manacle the bearherd in their chains,
If thou dar'st bring them to the baiting place.

RICHARD
Oft have I seen a hot o'erweening cur
Run back and bite because he was withheld,
Who, being suffered with the bear's fell paw,
Hath clapped his tail between his legs and cried;
And such a piece of service will you do
If you oppose yourselves to match Lord Warwick.

CLIFFORD
Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,
As crooked in thy manners as thy shape!

YORK
Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon.

CLIFFORD
Take heed, lest by your heat you burn yourselves.

KING HENRY
Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow?--
Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair,
Thou mad misleader of thy brainsick son!
What, wilt thou on thy deathbed play the ruffian
And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles?
O, where is faith? O, where is loyalty?
If it be banished from the frosty head,
Where shall it find a harbor in the earth?
Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war,
And shame thine honorable age with blood?
Why art thou old and want'st experience?
Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it?
For shame! In duty bend thy knee to me
That bows unto the grave with mickle age.

SALISBURY
My lord, I have considered with myself
The title of this most renowned duke,
And in my conscience do repute his Grace
The rightful heir to England's royal seat.

KING HENRY
Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me?

SALISBURY  I have.

KING HENRY
Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?

SALISBURY
It is great sin to swear unto a sin,
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.
Who can be bound by any solemn vow
To do a murd'rous deed, to rob a man,
To force a spotless virgin's chastity,
To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
To wring the widow from her customed right,
And have no other reason for this wrong
But that he was bound by a solemn oath?

QUEEN MARGARET
A subtle traitor needs no sophister.

KING HENRY, [to an Attendant]
Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.
[Attendant exits.]

YORK, [to King Henry]
Call Buckingham and all the friends thou hast,
I am resolved for death or dignity.

CLIFFORD
The first, I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.

WARWICK
You were best to go to bed and dream again,
To keep thee from the tempest of the field.

CLIFFORD
I am resolved to bear a greater storm
Than any thou canst conjure up today;
And that I'll write upon thy burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy house's badge.

WARWICK
Now, by my father's badge, old Neville's crest,
The rampant bear chained to the ragged staff,
This day I'll wear aloft my burgonet--
As on a mountaintop the cedar shows
That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm--
Even to affright thee with the view thereof.

CLIFFORD
And from thy burgonet I'll rend thy bear
And tread it under foot with all contempt,
Despite the bearherd that protects the bear.

YOUNG CLIFFORD
And so to arms, victorious father,
To quell the rebels and their complices.

RICHARD
Fie! Charity, for shame! Speak not in spite,
For you shall sup with Jesu Christ tonight.

YOUNG CLIFFORD
Foul stigmatic, that's more than thou canst tell!

RICHARD
If not in heaven, you'll surely sup in hell.
[They exit separately.]

Scene 2
=======
[The sign of the Castle Inn is displayed. Alarms.
Enter Warwick, wearing the white rose.]


WARWICK
Clifford of Cumberland, 'tis Warwick calls!
An if thou dost not hide thee from the bear,
Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum
And dead men's cries do fill the empty air,
Clifford, I say, come forth and fight with me;
Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.

[Enter York, wearing the white rose.]

How now, my noble lord? What, all afoot?

YORK
The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed,
But match to match I have encountered him
And made a prey for carrion kites and crows
Even of the bonny beast he loved so well.

[Enter old Clifford, wearing the red rose.]


WARWICK
Of one or both of us the time is come.

YORK
Hold, Warwick! Seek thee out some other chase,
For I myself must hunt this deer to death.

WARWICK
Then, nobly, York! 'Tis for a crown thou fight'st.--
As I intend, Clifford, to thrive today,
It grieves my soul to leave thee unassailed.
[Warwick exits.]

CLIFFORD
What seest thou in me, York? Why dost thou pause?

YORK
With thy brave bearing should I be in love,
But that thou art so fast mine enemy.

CLIFFORD
Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem,
But that 'tis shown ignobly and in treason.

YORK
So let it help me now against thy sword
As I in justice and true right express it!

CLIFFORD
My soul and body on the action both!

YORK
A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.
[They fight and Clifford falls.]

CLIFFORD
La fin courrone les oeuvres.	[He dies.]

YORK
Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.
Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will!
[He exits.]

[Enter young Clifford, wearing the red rose.]


YOUNG CLIFFORD
Shame and confusion! All is on the rout.
Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds
Where it should guard. O war, thou son of hell,
Whom angry heavens do make their minister,
Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part
Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly.
He that is truly dedicate to war
Hath no self-love; nor he that loves himself
Hath not essentially, but by circumstance,
The name of valor. [He sees his father, lying dead.] O,
let the vile world end
And the premised flames of the last day
Knit Earth and heaven together!
Now let the general trumpet blow his blast,
Particularities and petty sounds
To cease! Wast thou ordained, dear father,
To lose thy youth in peace, and to achieve
The silver livery of advised age,
And, in thy reverence and thy chair-days, thus
To die in ruffian battle? Even at this sight
My heart is turned to stone, and while 'tis mine,
It shall be stony. York not our old men spares;
No more will I their babes. Tears virginal
Shall be to me even as the dew to fire;
And beauty, that the tyrant oft reclaims,
Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax.
Henceforth I will not have to do with pity.
Meet I an infant of the house of York,
Into as many gobbets will I cut it
As wild Medea young Absyrtis did.
In cruelty will I seek out my fame.
[He takes his father's body onto his back.]
Come, thou new ruin of old Clifford's house;
As did Aeneas old Anchises bear,
So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders.
But then Aeneas bare a living load,
Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.	[He exits.]

[Enter Richard, wearing the white rose, and Somerset,
wearing the red rose, to fight.]

[Richard kills Somerset under the sign of Castle Inn.]


RICHARD  So lie thou there.
For underneath an alehouse' paltry sign,
The Castle in Saint Albans, Somerset
Hath made the wizard famous in his death.
Sword, hold thy temper! Heart, be wrathful still!
Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill.	[He exits.]

[Fight. Excursions. Enter King Henry, Queen
Margaret, both wearing the red rose, and Others.]


QUEEN MARGARET
Away, my lord! You are slow. For shame, away!

KING HENRY
Can we outrun the heavens? Good Margaret, stay!

QUEEN MARGARET
What are you made of? You'll nor fight nor fly.
Now is it manhood, wisdom, and defense
To give the enemy way, and to secure us
By what we can, which can no more but fly.
[Alarum afar off.]
If you be ta'en, we then should see the bottom
Of all our fortunes; but if we haply scape,
As well we may--if not through your neglect--
We shall to London get, where you are loved
And where this breach now in our fortunes made
May readily be stopped.

[Enter Young Clifford, wearing the red rose.]


YOUNG CLIFFORD
But that my heart's on future mischief set,
I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly;
But fly you must. Uncurable discomfit
Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
Away, for your relief! And we will live
To see their day and them our fortune give.
Away, my lord, away!
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Alarum. Retreat. Enter York, Edward, Richard,
Warwick, and Soldiers, all wearing the white rose,
with Drum and Colors.]


YORK
Of Salisbury, who can report of him,
That winter lion, who in rage forgets
Aged contusions and all brush of time,
And, like a gallant in the brow of youth,
Repairs him with occasion? This happy day
Is not itself, nor have we won one foot,
If Salisbury be lost.

RICHARD  My noble father,
Three times today I holp him to his horse,
Three times bestrid him. Thrice I led him off,
Persuaded him from any further act;
But still, where danger was, still there I met him,
And, like rich hangings in a homely house,
So was his will in his old feeble body.
But, noble as he is, look where he comes.

[Enter Salisbury, wearing the white rose.]

Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought today!

SALISBURY
By th' Mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard.
God knows how long it is I have to live,
And it hath pleased Him that three times today
You have defended me from imminent death.
Well, lords, we have not got that which we have;
'Tis not enough our foes are this time fled,
Being opposites of such repairing nature.

YORK
I know our safety is to follow them;
For, as I hear, the King is fled to London
To call a present court of Parliament.
Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth.--
What says Lord Warwick? Shall we after them?

WARWICK
After them? Nay, before them, if we can.
Now, by my hand, lords, 'twas a glorious day.
Saint Albans battle won by famous York
Shall be eternized in all age to come.--
Sound drum and trumpets, and to London all;
And more such days as these to us befall!
[Flourish. They exit.]



Henry VI, Part 3
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/henry-vi-part-3/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
KING HENRY VI
QUEEN MARGARET
PRINCE EDWARD
Lord CLIFFORD
Lancastrian supporters:
  Earl of NORTHUMBERLAND
  Earl of WESTMORLAND
  Duke of EXETER
  Earl of OXFORD
  Sir John SOMERVILLE
Supporters first of York, then of Lancaster:
  Earl of WARWICK
  Marquess of MONTAGUE
  Duke of SOMERSET
Richard Plantagenet, Duke of YORK
Sons of Richard, Duke of York:
  EDWARD, Earl of March, later KING EDWARD IV
  GEORGE, later Duke of CLARENCE
  RICHARD, later Duke of GLOUCESTER
  RUTLAND
SIR JOHN Mortimer, York's uncle
LADY GREY, later QUEEN ELIZABETH
Earl RIVERS, brother to the queen
Yorkist supporters:
  Duke of NORFOLK
  Earl of PEMBROKE
  Lord STAFFORD
  Lord HASTINGS
  Sir William STANLEY
  Sir John MONTGOMERY
KING LEWIS of France
LADY BONA, his sister-in-law
Rutland's TUTOR
A SON that has killed his father
A FATHER that has killed his son
FIRST GAMEKEEPER
SECOND GAMEKEEPER
A NOBLEMAN
POST
FIRST WATCH
SECOND WATCH
THIRD WATCH
HUNTSMAN
LIEUTENANT at the Tower of London
FIRST MESSENGER
SECOND MESSENGER
Other MESSENGERS
MAYOR of York
SOLDIER
Soldiers, Servants, Attendants, Drummers, Trumpeters, Sir Hugh Mortimer, Henry, Earl of Richmond, Aldermen of York, Mayor of Coventry, Nurse, the infant prince, and Others


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Alarum. Enter Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York;
Edward; Richard; Norfolk; Montague; Warwick; and
Soldiers, all wearing the white rose.]


WARWICK
I wonder how the King escaped our hands.

YORK
While we pursued the horsemen of the north,
He slyly stole away and left his men;
Whereat the great lord of Northumberland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Cheered up the drooping army; and himself,
Lord Clifford, and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
Charged our main battle's front and, breaking in,
Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.

EDWARD
Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerous.
I cleft his beaver with a downright blow.
That this is true, father, behold his blood.
[He shows his bloody sword.]

MONTAGUE, [to York, showing his sword]
And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,
Whom I encountered as the battles joined.

RICHARD, [holding up a severed head]
Speak thou for me, and tell them what I did.

YORK
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
But is your Grace dead, my lord of Somerset?

NORFOLK
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!

RICHARD
Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.

WARWICK
And so do I, victorious prince of York.
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
This is the palace of the fearful king,
And this the regal seat. Possess it, York,
For this is thine and not King Henry's heirs'.

YORK
Assist me, then, sweet Warwick, and I will,
For hither we have broken in by force.

NORFOLK
We'll all assist you. He that flies shall die.

YORK
Thanks, gentle Norfolk. Stay by me, my lords.--
And soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.
[They go up onto a dais or platform.]

WARWICK
And when the King comes, offer him no violence
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
[Soldiers exit or retire out of sight.]

YORK
The Queen this day here holds her parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her council.
By words or blows, here let us win our right.

RICHARD
Armed as we are, let's stay within this house.

WARWICK
"The Bloody Parliament" shall this be called
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king
And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice
Hath made us bywords to our enemies.

YORK
Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute.
I mean to take possession of my right.

WARWICK
Neither the King nor he that loves him best,
The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing if Warwick shake his bells.
I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares.
Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.
[York sits in the chair of state.]

[Flourish. Enter King Henry, Clifford, Northumberland,
Westmorland, Exeter, and the rest, all wearing
the red rose.]


KING HENRY
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state! Belike he means,
Backed by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father,
And thine, Lord Clifford, and you both have vowed
revenge
On him, his sons, his favorites, and his friends.

NORTHUMBERLAND
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!

CLIFFORD
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.

WESTMORLAND
What, shall we suffer this? Let's pluck him down.
My heart for anger burns. I cannot brook it.

KING HENRY
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmorland.

CLIFFORD
Patience is for poltroons such as he.
He durst not sit there had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here in the Parliament
Let us assail the family of York.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Well hast thou spoken, cousin. Be it so.

KING HENRY
Ah, know you not the city favors them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?

EXETER
But when the Duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.

KING HENRY
Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of the Parliament House!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words, and threats
Shall be the war that Henry means to use.--
Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne
And kneel for grace and mercy at my feet.
I am thy sovereign.

YORK  I am thine.

EXETER
For shame, come down. He made thee Duke of
York.

YORK
It was my inheritance, as the earldom was.

EXETER
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.

WARWICK
Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
In following this usurping Henry.

CLIFFORD
Whom should he follow but his natural king?

WARWICK
True, Clifford, that's Richard, Duke of York.

KING HENRY, [to York]
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?

YORK
It must and shall be so. Content thyself.

WARWICK, [to King Henry]
Be Duke of Lancaster. Let him be king.

WESTMORLAND
He is both king and Duke of Lancaster,
And that the lord of Westmorland shall maintain.

WARWICK
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those which chased you from the field
And slew your fathers and, with colors spread,
Marched through the city to the palace gates.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;
And by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.

WESTMORLAND
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons,
Thy kinsmen, and thy friends, I'll have more lives
Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.

CLIFFORD
Urge it no more, lest that, instead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger
As shall revenge his death before I stir.

WARWICK
Poor Clifford, how I scorn his worthless threats!

YORK
Will you we show our title to the crown?
If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.

KING HENRY
What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was as thou art, Duke of York;
Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March.
I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop
And seized upon their towns and provinces.

WARWICK
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.

KING HENRY
The Lord Protector lost it and not I.
When I was crowned, I was but nine months old.

RICHARD
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you
lose.--
Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.

EDWARD
Sweet father, do so. Set it on your head.

MONTAGUE, [to York]
Good brother, as thou lov'st and honorest arms,
Let's fight it out and not stand caviling thus.

RICHARD
Sound drums and trumpets, and the King will fly.

YORK  Sons, peace!

KING HENRY
Peace thou, and give King Henry leave to speak!

WARWICK
Plantagenet shall speak first. Hear him, lords,
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him shall not live.

KING HENRY
Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
No. First shall war unpeople this my realm;
Ay, and their colors, often borne in France,
And now in England to our heart's great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
My title's good, and better far than his.

WARWICK
Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be king.

KING HENRY
Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.

YORK
'Twas by rebellion against his king.

KING HENRY, [aside]
I know not what to say; my title's weak.--
Tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?

YORK  What then?

KING HENRY
An if he may, then am I lawful king;
For Richard, in the view of many lords,
Resigned the crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was, and I am his.

YORK
He rose against him, being his sovereign,
And made him to resign his crown perforce.

WARWICK
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrained,
Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?

EXETER
No, for he could not so resign his crown
But that the next heir should succeed and reign.

KING HENRY
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?

EXETER
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.

YORK
Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?

EXETER
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.

KING HENRY, [aside]
All will revolt from me and turn to him.

NORTHUMBERLAND, [to York]
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,
Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.

WARWICK
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Thou art deceived. 'Tis not thy southern power
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the Duke up in despite of me.

CLIFFORD
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defense.
May that ground gape and swallow me alive
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father.

KING HENRY
O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!

YORK
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.--
What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?

WARWICK, [to King Henry]
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
Write up his title with usurping blood.
[He stamps with his foot,
and the Soldiers show themselves.]

KING HENRY
My lord of Warwick, hear but one word:
Let me for this my lifetime reign as king.

YORK
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou liv'st.

KING HENRY
I am content. Richard Plantagenet,
Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.

CLIFFORD
What wrong is this unto the Prince your son!

WARWICK
What good is this to England and himself!

WESTMORLAND
Base, fearful, and despairing Henry!

CLIFFORD
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!

WESTMORLAND
I cannot stay to hear these articles.

NORTHUMBERLAND  Nor I.

CLIFFORD
Come, cousin, let us tell the Queen these news.

WESTMORLAND
Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,
In whose cold blood no spark of honor bides.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unmanly deed.

CLIFFORD
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandoned and despised!
[Westmorland, Northumberland, Clifford,
and their Soldiers exit.]

WARWICK
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.

EXETER
They seek revenge and therefore will not yield.

KING HENRY
Ah, Exeter!

WARWICK  Why should you sigh, my lord?

KING HENRY
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may. [(To York.)] I here entail
The crown to thee and to thine heirs forever,
Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
To cease this civil war and, whilst I live,
To honor me as thy king and sovereign,
And neither by treason nor hostility
To seek to put me down and reign thyself.

YORK
This oath I willingly take and will perform.

WARWICK
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet, embrace him.
[York stands, and King Henry ascends the dais.]

KING HENRY, [to York]
And long live thou and these thy forward sons!
[They embrace.]

YORK
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.

EXETER
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes.
[Sennet. Here they come down.]

YORK, [to King Henry]
Farewell, my gracious lord. I'll to my castle.

WARWICK
And I'll keep London with my soldiers.

NORFOLK
And I to Norfolk with my followers.

MONTAGUE
And I unto the sea, from whence I came.
[York, Edward, Richard, Warwick, Norfolk,
Montague, and their Soldiers exit.]

KING HENRY
And I with grief and sorrow to the court.

[Enter Queen Margaret, with Prince Edward.]


EXETER
Here comes the Queen, whose looks bewray her
anger.
I'll steal away.

KING HENRY  Exeter, so will I.
[They begin to exit.]

QUEEN MARGARET
Nay, go not from me. I will follow thee.

KING HENRY
Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.

QUEEN MARGARET
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah, wretched man, would I had died a maid
And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father.
Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourished him as I did with my blood,
Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood
there,
Rather than have made that savage duke thine heir
And disinherited thine only son.

PRINCE EDWARD
Father, you cannot disinherit me.
If you be king, why should not I succeed?

KING HENRY
Pardon me, Margaret.--Pardon me, sweet son.
The Earl of Warwick and the Duke enforced me.

QUEEN MARGARET
Enforced thee? Art thou king and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch,
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son, and me,
And giv'n unto the house of York such head
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance!
To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
What is it but to make thy sepulcher
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is Chancellor and the lord of Callice;
Stern Falconbridge commands the Narrow Seas;
The Duke is made Protector of the realm;
And yet shalt thou be safe? Such safety finds
The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
The soldiers should have tossed me on their pikes
Before I would have granted to that act.
But thou preferr'st thy life before thine honor.
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself
Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act of Parliament be repealed
Whereby my son is disinherited.
The northern lords that have forsworn thy colors
Will follow mine if once they see them spread;
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of the house of York.
Thus do I leave thee.--Come, son, let's away.
Our army is ready. Come, we'll after them.

KING HENRY
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET
Thou hast spoke too much already. Get thee gone.

KING HENRY
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?

QUEEN MARGARET
Ay, to be murdered by his enemies!

PRINCE EDWARD
When I return with victory from the field,
I'll see your Grace. Till then, I'll follow her.

QUEEN MARGARET
Come, son, away. We may not linger thus.
[Queen Margaret and Prince Edward exit.]

KING HENRY
Poor queen! How love to me and to her son
Hath made her break out into terms of rage!
Revenged may she be on that hateful duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of me and of my son.
The loss of those three lords torments my heart.
I'll write unto them and entreat them fair.
Come, cousin, you shall be the messenger.

EXETER
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
[Flourish. They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Richard, Edward, and Montague,
all wearing the white rose.]


RICHARD
Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.

EDWARD
No, I can better play the orator.

MONTAGUE
But I have reasons strong and forcible.

[Enter the Duke of York.]


YORK
Why, how now, sons and brother, at a strife?
What is your quarrel? How began it first?

EDWARD
No quarrel, but a slight contention.

YORK  About what?

RICHARD
About that which concerns your Grace and us:
The crown of England, father, which is yours.

YORK
Mine, boy? Not till King Henry be dead.

RICHARD
Your right depends not on his life or death.

EDWARD
Now you are heir; therefore enjoy it now.
By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you, father, in the end.

YORK
I took an oath that he should quietly reign.

EDWARD
But for a kingdom any oath may be broken.
I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.

RICHARD
No, God forbid your Grace should be forsworn.

YORK
I shall be, if I claim by open war.

RICHARD
I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.

YORK
Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.

RICHARD
An oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful magistrate
That hath authority over him that swears.
Henry had none, but did usurp the place.
Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown,
Within whose circuit is Elysium
And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
Why do we linger thus? I cannot rest
Until the white rose that I wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.

YORK
Richard, enough. I will be king or die.--
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.--
Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk
And tell him privily of our intent.--
You, Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise;
In them I trust, for they are soldiers
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employed, what resteth more
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the King not privy to my drift,
Nor any of the house of Lancaster.

[Enter a Messenger.]

But stay, what news? Why com'st thou in such post?

MESSENGER
The Queen with all the northern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege you in your castle.
She is hard by with twenty thousand men.
And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.	[He exits.]

YORK
Ay, with my sword. What, think'st thou that we fear
them?--
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me;
My brother Montague shall post to London.
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left Protectors of the King,
With powerful policy strengthen themselves
And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.

MONTAGUE
Brother, I go. I'll win them, fear it not.
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.
[Montague exits.]

[Enter Sir John Mortimer, and his brother,
Sir Hugh Mortimer.]


YORK
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour.
The army of the Queen mean to besiege us.

SIR JOHN
She shall not need; we'll meet her in the field.

YORK  What, with five thousand men?

RICHARD
Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need.
A woman's general; what should we fear?
[A march afar off.]

EDWARD
I hear their drums. Let's set our men in order,
And issue forth and bid them battle straight.

YORK
Five men to twenty: though the odds be great,
I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.
Many a battle have I won in France
Whenas the enemy hath been ten to one.
Why should I not now have the like success?
[Alarum. They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Rutland and his Tutor.]


RUTLAND
Ah, whither shall I fly to scape their hands?

[Enter Clifford with Soldiers, all wearing the red rose.]

Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes.

CLIFFORD
Chaplain, away. Thy priesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of this accursed duke,
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.

TUTOR
And I, my lord, will bear him company.

CLIFFORD  Soldiers, away with him.

TUTOR
Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both of God and man.
[He exits, dragged off by Soldiers.]

CLIFFORD, [approaching Rutland]
How now? Is he dead already? Or is it fear
That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.

RUTLAND
So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch
That trembles under his devouring paws;
And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey;
And so he comes to rend his limbs asunder.
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword
And not with such a cruel threat'ning look.
Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
I am too mean a subject for thy wrath.
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.

CLIFFORD
In vain thou speak'st, poor boy. My father's blood
Hath stopped the passage where thy words should
enter.

RUTLAND
Then let my father's blood open it again;
He is a man and, Clifford, cope with him.

CLIFFORD
Had I thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me.
No, if I digged up thy forefathers' graves
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York
Is as a fury to torment my soul,
And till I root out their accursed line
And leave not one alive, I live in hell.
Therefore--	[He raises his rapier.]

RUTLAND
O, let me pray before I take my death!
To thee I pray: sweet Clifford, pity me!

CLIFFORD
Such pity as my rapier's point affords.

RUTLAND
I never did thee harm. Why wilt thou slay me?

CLIFFORD
Thy father hath.

RUTLAND  But 'twas ere I was born.
Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me,
Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in prison all my days,
And when I give occasion of offense
Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.

CLIFFORD
No cause? Thy father slew my father; therefore die.
[He stabs Rutland.]

RUTLAND
Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!	[He dies.]

CLIFFORD
Plantagenet, I come, Plantagenet!
And this thy son's blood, cleaving to my blade,
Shall rust upon my weapon till thy blood,
Congealed with this, do make me wipe off both.
[He exits, with Soldiers carrying off Rutland's body.]

Scene 4
=======
[Alarum. Enter Richard, Duke of York, wearing the
white rose.]


YORK
The army of the Queen hath got the field.
My uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
And all my followers to the eager foe
Turn back and fly like ships before the wind,
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them;
But this I know: they have demeaned themselves
Like men borne to renown by life or death.
Three times did Richard make a lane to me
And thrice cried "Courage, father, fight it out!"
And full as oft came Edward to my side,
With purple falchion painted to the hilt
In blood of those that had encountered him;
And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
Richard cried "Charge, and give no foot of ground!"
And cried "A crown or else a glorious tomb;
A scepter or an earthly sepulcher!"
With this we charged again; but, out alas,
We budged again, as I have seen a swan
With bootless labor swim against the tide
And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
[A short alarum within.]
Ah, hark, the fatal followers do pursue,
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury;
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury.
The sands are numbered that makes up my life.
Here must I stay, and here my life must end.

[Enter Queen Margaret, Clifford, Northumberland,
the young Prince Edward, and Soldiers,
all wearing the red rose.]

Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchless fury to more rage.
I am your butt, and I abide your shot.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.

CLIFFORD
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm
With downright payment showed unto my father.
Now Phaeton hath tumbled from his car
And made an evening at the noontide prick.

YORK
My ashes, as the Phoenix', may bring forth
A bird that will revenge upon you all;
And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? What, multitudes, and fear?

CLIFFORD
So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons;
So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.

YORK
O Clifford, but bethink thee once again
And in thy thought o'errun my former time;
And, if thou canst for blushing, view this face
And bite thy tongue that slanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this.

CLIFFORD
I will not bandy with thee word for word,
But buckler with thee blows twice two for one.

QUEEN MARGARET
Hold, valiant Clifford, for a thousand causes
I would prolong a while the traitor's life.--
Wrath makes him deaf; speak thou, Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Hold, Clifford, do not honor him so much
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart.
What valor were it when a cur doth grin
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
It is war's prize to take all vantages,
And ten to one is no impeach of valor.
[They attack York.]

CLIFFORD
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.

NORTHUMBERLAND
So doth the coney struggle in the net.

YORK
So triumph thieves upon their conquered booty;
So true men yield with robbers, so o'ermatched.
[York is overcome.]

NORTHUMBERLAND, [to Queen Margaret]
What would your Grace have done unto him now?

QUEEN MARGARET
Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come, make him stand upon this molehill here
That raught at mountains with outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
[They place York on a small prominence.]
What, was it you that would be England's king?
Was 't you that reveled in our parliament
And made a preachment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now,
The wanton Edward and the lusty George?
And where's that valiant crookback prodigy,
Dickie, your boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
Look, York, I stained this napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford with his rapier's point
Made issue from the bosom of the boy;
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
[She gives him a bloody cloth.]
Alas, poor York, but that I hate thee deadly
I should lament thy miserable state.
I prithee grieve to make me merry, York.
What, hath thy fiery heart so parched thine entrails
That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death?
Why art thou patient, man? Thou shouldst be mad;
And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou would'st be fee'd, I see, to make me sport.--
York cannot speak unless he wear a crown.
A crown for York!	[She is handed a paper crown.]
And, lords, bow low to him.
Hold you his hands whilst I do set it on.
[She puts the crown on York's head.]
Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king.
Ay, this is he that took King Henry's chair,
And this is he was his adopted heir.
But how is it that great Plantagenet
Is crowned so soon and broke his solemn oath?--
As I bethink me, you should not be king
Till our King Henry had shook hands with Death.
And will you pale your head in Henry's glory
And rob his temples of the diadem
Now, in his life, against your holy oath?
O, 'tis a fault too too unpardonable.
Off with the crown and, with the crown, his head;
And whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.

CLIFFORD
That is my office, for my father's sake.

QUEEN MARGARET
Nay, stay, let's hear the orisons he makes.

YORK
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of
France,
Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth:
How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
To triumph like an Amazonian trull
Upon their woes whom Fortune captivates.
But that thy face is vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thou cam'st, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not
shameless.
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils, and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen,
Unless the adage must be verified
That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
'Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud,
But God He knows thy share thereof is small.
'Tis virtue that doth make them most admired;
The contrary doth make thee wondered at.
'Tis government that makes them seem divine;
The want thereof makes thee abominable.
Thou art as opposite to every good
As the Antipodes are unto us
Or as the south to the Septentrion.
O, tiger's heart wrapped in a woman's hide,
How couldst thou drain the lifeblood of the child
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful, and flexible;
Thou, stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bidd'st thou me rage? Why, now thou hast thy wish.
Wouldst have me weep? Why, now thou hast thy will;
For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies,
And every drop cries vengeance for his death
'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false
Frenchwoman!

NORTHUMBERLAND, [aside]
Beshrew me, but his passions moves me so
That hardly can I check my eyes from tears.

YORK
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Would not have touched, would not have stained
with blood;
But you are more inhuman, more inexorable,
O, ten times more than tigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears.
This cloth thou dipped'st in blood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do wash the blood away.
[He hands her the cloth.]
Keep thou the napkin and go boast of this;
And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears.
Yea, even my foes will shed fast-falling tears
And say "Alas, it was a piteous deed."
[He hands her the paper crown.]
There, take the crown and, with the crown, my
curse,
And in thy need such comfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand.--
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world,
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Had he been slaughterman to all my kin,
I should not for my life but weep with him
To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.

QUEEN MARGARET
What, weeping ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.

CLIFFORD, [stabbing York twice]
Here's for my oath; here's for my father's death!

QUEEN MARGARET, [stabbing York]
And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.

YORK
Open thy gate of mercy, gracious God.
My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.
[He dies.]

QUEEN MARGARET
Off with his head, and set it on York gates,
So York may overlook the town of York.
[Flourish. They exit, Soldiers carrying York's body.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[A march. Enter Edward, Richard, and their power,
all wearing the white rose.]


EDWARD
I wonder how our princely father scaped,
Or whether he be scaped away or no
From Clifford's and Northumberland's pursuit.
Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news;
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;
Or had he scaped, methinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my brother? Why is he so sad?

RICHARD
I cannot joy until I be resolved
Where our right valiant father is become.
I saw him in the battle range about
And watched him how he singled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herd of neat,
Or as a bear encompassed round with dogs,
Who having pinched a few and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof and bark at him;
So fared our father with his enemies;
So fled his enemies my warlike father.
Methinks 'tis prize enough to be his son.
See how the morning opes her golden gates
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun.
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Trimmed like a younker, prancing to his love!

EDWARD
Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?

RICHARD
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun,
Not separated with the racking clouds
But severed in a pale clear-shining sky.
See, see, they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vowed some league inviolable.
Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun;
In this, the heaven figures some event.

EDWARD
'Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meeds,
Should notwithstanding join our lights together
And overshine the earth, as this the world.
Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear
Upon my target three fair shining suns.

RICHARD
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,
You love the breeder better than the male.

[Enter a Messenger, blowing.]

But what art thou whose heavy looks foretell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?

MESSENGER
Ah, one that was a woeful looker-on
Whenas the noble Duke of York was slain,
Your princely father and my loving lord.

EDWARD
O, speak no more, for I have heard too much!

RICHARD
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.

MESSENGER
Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them, as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks that would have entered Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
And many strokes, though with a little axe,
Hews down and fells the hardest-timbered oak.
By many hands your father was subdued,
But only slaughtered by the ireful arm
Of unrelenting Clifford and the Queen,
Who crowned the gracious duke in high despite,
Laughed in his face; and when with grief he wept,
The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks
A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain.
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his head and on the gates of York
They set the same, and there it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle that e'er I viewed.	[He exits.]

EDWARD
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
O Clifford, boist'rous Clifford, thou hast slain
The flower of Europe for his chivalry;
And treacherously hast thou vanquished him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquished thee.
Now my soul's palace is become a prison;
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest,
For never henceforth shall I joy again.
Never, O never, shall I see more joy!	[He weeps.]

RICHARD
I cannot weep, for all my body's moisture
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart;
Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burden,
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast
And burns me up with flames that tears would
quench.
To weep is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears, then, for babes; blows and revenge for me.
Richard, I bear thy name. I'll venge thy death
Or die renowned by attempting it.

EDWARD
His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;
His dukedom and his chair with me is left.

RICHARD
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun;
For "chair" and "dukedom," "throne" and
"kingdom" say;
Either that is thine or else thou wert not his.

[March. Enter Warwick, Marquess Montague, and their
army, all wearing the white rose.]


WARWICK
How now, fair lords? What fare, what news abroad?

RICHARD
Great lord of Warwick, if we should recount
Our baleful news, and at each word's deliverance
Stab poniards in our flesh till all were told,
The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain.

EDWARD
O Warwick, Warwick, that Plantagenet
Which held thee dearly as his soul's redemption
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.

WARWICK
Ten days ago I drowned these news in tears.
And now to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
I, then in London, keeper of the King,
Mustered my soldiers, gathered flocks of friends,
Marched toward Saint Albans to intercept the
Queen,
Bearing the King in my behalf along;
For by my scouts I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late decree in Parliament
Touching King Henry's oath and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Albans met,
Our battles joined, and both sides fiercely fought.
But whether 'twas the coldness of the King,
Who looked full gently on his warlike queen,
That robbed my soldiers of their heated spleen,
Or whether 'twas report of her success
Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigor,
Who thunders to his captives blood and death,
I cannot judge; but to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightning came and went;
Our soldiers', like the night owl's lazy flight
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
I cheered them up with justice of our cause,
With promise of high pay and great rewards,
But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
And we, in them, no hope to win the day,
So that we fled: the King unto the Queen;
Lord George your brother, Norfolk, and myself
In haste, posthaste, are come to join with you;
For in the Marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.

EDWARD
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?

WARWICK
Some six miles off the Duke is with the soldiers,
And, for your brother, he was lately sent
From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers to this needful war.

RICHARD
'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled.
Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.

WARWICK
Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear?
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head
And wring the awful scepter from his fist,
Were he as famous and as bold in war
As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.

RICHARD
I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not.
'Tis love I bear thy glories make me speak.
But in this troublous time, what's to be done?
Shall we go throw away our coats of steel
And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numb'ring our Ave Marys with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
If for the last, say "Ay," and to it, lords.

WARWICK
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out,
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me, lords: the proud insulting queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland
And of their feather many more proud birds,
Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax.
He swore consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the Parliament.
And now to London all the crew are gone
To frustrate both his oath and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong.
Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,
With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why, via, to London will we march,
And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
And once again cry "Charge!" upon our foes,
But never once again turn back and fly.

RICHARD
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak.
Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day
That cries "Retire!" if Warwick bid him stay.

EDWARD
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean,
And when thou fail'st--as God forbid the hour!--
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend.

WARWICK
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York;
The next degree is England's royal throne:
For King of England shalt thou be proclaimed
In every borough as we pass along,
And he that throws not up his cap for joy
Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets and about our task.

RICHARD
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it or to give thee mine.

EDWARD
Then strike up drums! God and Saint George for us!

[Enter a Messenger.]


WARWICK  How now, what news?

MESSENGER
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The Queen is coming with a puissant host,
And craves your company for speedy counsel.

WARWICK
Why, then it sorts. Brave warriors, let's away!
[They all exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter King Henry, Queen Margaret,
Clifford, Northumberland, and young Prince Edward,
all wearing the red rose with Drum and Trumpets,
the head of York fixed above them.]


QUEEN MARGARET, [to King Henry]
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
That sought to be encompassed with your crown.
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?

KING HENRY
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wrack!
To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
Withhold revenge, dear God! 'Tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.

CLIFFORD
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn, being trodden on,
And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York did level at thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows.
He, but a duke, would have his son a king
And raise his issue like a loving sire;
Thou being a king, blest with a goodly son,
Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
Which argued thee a most unloving father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them, even with those wings
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climbed unto their nest,
Offering their own lives in their young's defense?
For shame, my liege, make them your precedent.
Were it not pity that this goodly boy
Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child
"What my great-grandfather and grandsire got,
My careless father fondly gave away"?
Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy,
And let his manly face, which promiseth
Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.

KING HENRY
Full well hath Clifford played the orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
That things ill got had ever bad success?
And happy always was it for that son
Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
I'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind,
And would my father had left me no more;
For all the rest is held at such a rate
As brings a thousandfold more care to keep
Than in possession any jot of pleasure.
Ah, cousin York, would thy best friends did know
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here.

QUEEN MARGARET
My lord, cheer up your spirits; our foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
You promised knighthood to our forward son.
Unsheathe your sword and dub him presently.--
Edward, kneel down.	[He kneels.]

KING HENRY, [dubbing him knight]
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight,
And learn this lesson: draw thy sword in right.

PRINCE EDWARD, [rising]
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
I'll draw it as apparent to the crown
And in that quarrel use it to the death.

CLIFFORD
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
Royal commanders, be in readiness,
For with a band of thirty thousand men
Comes Warwick backing of the Duke of York,
And in the towns as they do march along
Proclaims him king, and many fly to him.
Deraign your battle, for they are at hand.	[He exits.]

CLIFFORD
I would your Highness would depart the field.
The Queen hath best success when you are absent.

QUEEN MARGARET
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.

KING HENRY
Why, that's my fortune too; therefore I'll stay.

NORTHUMBERLAND
Be it with resolution, then, to fight.

PRINCE EDWARD
My royal father, cheer these noble lords
And hearten those that fight in your defense.
Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry "Saint
George!"

[March. Enter Edward, Warwick, Richard,
George, Norfolk, Montague, and Soldiers,
all wearing the white rose.]


EDWARD
Now, perjured Henry, wilt thou kneel for grace
And set thy diadem upon my head,
Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?

QUEEN MARGARET
Go rate thy minions, proud insulting boy.
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?

EDWARD
I am his king, and he should bow his knee.
I was adopted heir by his consent.
Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,
You that are king, though he do wear the crown,
Have caused him, by new act of Parliament,
To blot out me and put his own son in.

CLIFFORD  And reason too:
Who should succeed the father but the son?

RICHARD
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!

CLIFFORD
Ay, crookback, here I stand to answer thee,
Or any he, the proudest of thy sort.

RICHARD
'Twas you that killed young Rutland, was it not?

CLIFFORD
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.

RICHARD
For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight!

WARWICK
What sayst thou, Henry? Wilt thou yield the crown?

QUEEN MARGARET
Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick, dare you
speak?
When you and I met at Saint Albans last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.

WARWICK
Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.

CLIFFORD
You said so much before, and yet you fled.

WARWICK
'Twas not your valor, Clifford, drove me thence.

NORTHUMBERLAND
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.

RICHARD
Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.--
Break off the parley, for scarce I can refrain
The execution of my big-swoll'n heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.

CLIFFORD
I slew thy father; call'st thou him a child?

RICHARD
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland.
But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.

KING HENRY
Have done with words, my lords, and hear me
speak.

QUEEN MARGARET
Defy them, then, or else hold close thy lips.

KING HENRY
I prithee, give no limits to my tongue.
I am a king and privileged to speak.

CLIFFORD
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words; therefore, be still.

RICHARD
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword.
By Him that made us all, I am resolved
That Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.

EDWARD
Say, Henry, shall I have my right or no?
A thousand men have broke their fasts today
That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.

WARWICK
If thou deny, their blood upon thy head,
For York in justice puts his armor on.

PRINCE EDWARD
If that be right which Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong, but everything is right.

RICHARD
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands,
For well I wot thou hast thy mother's tongue.

QUEEN MARGARET
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam,
But like a foul misshapen stigmatic,
Marked by the Destinies to be avoided,
As venom toads or lizards' dreadful stings.

RICHARD
Iron of Naples, hid with English gilt,
Whose father bears the title of a king,
As if a channel should be called the sea,
Sham'st thou not, knowing whence thou art
extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy baseborn heart?

EDWARD
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns
To make this shameless callet know herself.--
Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
Although thy husband may be Menelaus;
And ne'er was Agamemnon's brother wronged
By that false woman as this king by thee.
His father reveled in the heart of France,
And tamed the King, and made the Dauphin stoop;
And had he matched according to his state,
He might have kept that glory to this day.
But when he took a beggar to his bed
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal day,
Even then that sunshine brewed a shower for him
That washed his father's fortunes forth of France
And heaped sedition on his crown at home.
For what hath broached this tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept,
And we, in pity of the gentle king,
Had slipped our claim until another age.

GEORGE
But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bred us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root;
And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
Yet know thou, since we have begun to strike,
We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.

EDWARD
And in this resolution, I defy thee,
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou denied'st the gentle king to speak.--
Sound, trumpets! Let our bloody colors wave;
And either victory or else a grave!

QUEEN MARGARET  Stay, Edward!

EDWARD
No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay.
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
[They all exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Alarum. Excursions. Enter Warwick,
wearing the white rose.]


WARWICK, [lying down]
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
I lay me down a little while to breathe,
For strokes received and many blows repaid
Have robbed my strong-knit sinews of their strength;
And spite of spite, needs must I rest awhile.

[Enter Edward, wearing the white rose, running.]


EDWARD
Smile, gentle heaven, or strike, ungentle death,
For this world frowns and Edward's sun is clouded.

[Enter George, wearing the white rose.]


WARWICK, [standing]
How now, my lord, what hap? What hope of good?

GEORGE
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us.
What counsel give you? Whither shall we fly?

EDWARD
Bootless is flight; they follow us with wings,
And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.

[Enter Richard, wearing the white rose.]


RICHARD
Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
Thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
Broached with the steely point of Clifford's lance,
And in the very pangs of death he cried,
Like to a dismal clangor heard from far,
"Warwick, revenge! Brother, revenge my death!"
So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
That stained their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.

WARWICK
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood!
I'll kill my horse because I will not fly.
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses whiles the foe doth rage,
And look upon, as if the tragedy
Were played in jest by counterfeiting actors?
[He kneels.]
Here on my knee I vow to God above
I'll never pause again, never stand still,
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine
Or Fortune given me measure of revenge.

EDWARD
O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine,
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine
[He kneels.]
And, ere my knee rise from the Earth's cold face,
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to Thee,
Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,
Beseeching Thee, if with Thy will it stands
That to my foes this body must be prey,
Yet that Thy brazen gates of heaven may ope
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul.
[Edward and Warwick stand.]
Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
Where'er it be, in heaven or in Earth.

RICHARD
Brother, give me thy hand.--And, gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms.
I that did never weep now melt with woe
That winter should cut off our springtime so.

WARWICK
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords, farewell.

GEORGE
Yet let us all together to our troops
And give them leave to fly that will not stay,
And call them pillars that will stand to us;
And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As victors wear at the Olympian Games.
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
For yet is hope of life and victory.
Forslow no longer; make we hence amain.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Excursions. Enter, at separate doors, Richard wearing
the white rose, and Clifford, wearing the red rose.]


RICHARD
Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone.
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland, both bound to revenge,
Wert thou environed with a brazen wall.

CLIFFORD
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone.
This is the hand that stabbed thy father York,
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland,
And here's the heart that triumphs in their death
And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
To execute the like upon thyself.
And so, have at thee!

[They fight; Warwick comes; Clifford flies.]


RICHARD
Nay, Warwick, single out some other chase,
For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Alarum. Enter King Henry alone, wearing the red rose.]


KING HENRY
This battle fares like to the morning's war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light,
What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide to combat with the wind;
Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by fury of the wind.
Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;
Now one the better, then another best,
Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror nor conquered.
So is the equal poise of this fell war.
Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
[He sits on a small prominence.]
To whom God will, there be the victory;
For Margaret my queen and Clifford too
Have chid me from the battle, swearing both
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead, if God's good will were so,
For what is in this world but grief and woe?
O God! Methinks it were a happy life
To be no better than a homely swain,
To sit upon a hill as I do now,
To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minutes how they run:
How many makes the hour full complete,
How many hours brings about the day,
How many days will finish up the year,
How many years a mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the times:
So many hours must I tend my flock,
So many hours must I take my rest,
So many hours must I contemplate,
So many hours must I sport myself,
So many days my ewes have been with young,
So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean,
So many years ere I shall shear the fleece;
So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
Passed over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this! How sweet, how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn bush a sweeter shade
To shepherds looking on their silly sheep
Than doth a rich embroidered canopy
To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
O yes, it doth, a thousandfold it doth.
And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle,
His wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince's delicates--
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
His body couched in a curious bed--
When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.

[Alarum. Enter at one door a Son that hath killed his
Father, carrying the body.]


SON
Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of crowns,
And I, that haply take them from him now,
May yet ere night yield both my life and them
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
Who's this? O God! It is my father's face,
Whom in this conflict I unwares have killed.
O heavy times, begetting such events!
From London by the King was I pressed forth.
My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man,
Came on the part of York, pressed by his master.
And I, who at his hands received my life,
Have by my hands of life bereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did;
And pardon, father, for I knew not thee.
My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks,
And no more words till they have flowed their fill.
[He weeps.]

KING HENRY
O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!
Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
Weep, wretched man. I'll aid thee tear for tear,
And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears and break, o'ercharged with grief.

[Enter at another door a Father that hath killed his Son,
bearing of his Son's body.]


FATHER
Thou that so stoutly hath resisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold,
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: is this our foeman's face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son!
Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye! See, see, what showers arise,
Blown with the windy tempest of my heart
Upon thy wounds, that kills mine eye and heart!
O, pity God this miserable age!
What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous, and unnatural
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
O, boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!

KING HENRY
Woe above woe, grief more than common grief!
O, that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colors of our striving houses;
The one his purple blood right well resembles,
The other his pale cheeks methinks presenteth.
Wither one rose and let the other flourish;
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.

SON
How will my mother for a father's death
Take on with me and ne'er be satisfied!

FATHER
How will my wife for slaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears and ne'er be satisfied!

KING HENRY
How will the country for these woeful chances
Misthink the King and not be satisfied!

SON
Was ever son so rued a father's death?

FATHER
Was ever father so bemoaned his son?

KING HENRY
Was ever king so grieved for subjects' woe?
Much is your sorrow, mine ten times so much.

SON
I'll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.
[He exits, bearing the body.]

FATHER
These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;
My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulcher,
For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go.
My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thy father be
E'en for the loss of thee, having no more,
As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
I'll bear thee hence, and let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.
[He exits, bearing the body.]

KING HENRY
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
Here sits a king more woeful than you are.

[Alarums. Excursions. Enter Queen Margaret, Prince
Edward, and Exeter, all wearing the red rose.]


PRINCE EDWARD
Fly, father, fly, for all your friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like a chafed bull.
Away, for Death doth hold us in pursuit.

QUEEN MARGARET
Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain.
Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath
And bloody steel grasped in their ireful hands,
Are at our backs, and therefore hence amain.

EXETER
Away, for Vengeance comes along with them.
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed;
Or else come after; I'll away before.

KING HENRY
Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter;
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whither the Queen intends. Forward, away!
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[A loud alarum. Enter Clifford,
wearing the red rose, wounded.]


CLIFFORD
Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies,
Which whiles it lasted gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow
More than my body's parting with my soul!
My love and fear glued many friends to thee;
And now I fall, thy tough commixtures melts,
Impairing Henry, strength'ning misproud York;
And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henry's enemies?
O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
That Phaeton should check thy fiery steeds,
Thy burning car never had scorched the Earth!
And Henry, hadst thou swayed as kings should do,
Or as thy father and his father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like summer flies;
I and ten thousand in this luckless realm
Had left no mourning widows for our death,
And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds;
No way to fly, no strength to hold out flight.
The foe is merciless and will not pity,
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest.
I stabbed your fathers' bosoms; split my breast.
[He faints.]

[Alarum and retreat. Enter Edward, Warwick,
Richard, and Soldiers, Montague, and George,
all wearing the white rose.]


EDWARD
Now breathe we, lords. Good fortune bids us pause
And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
As doth a sail filled with a fretting gust
Command an argosy to stem the waves.
But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?

WARWICK
No, 'tis impossible he should escape,
For, though before his face I speak the words,
Your brother Richard marked him for the grave,
And wheresoe'er he is, he's surely dead.
[Clifford groans, and dies.]

RICHARD
Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?
A deadly groan, like life and death's departing.

EDWARD
See who it is; and, now the battle's ended,
If friend or foe, let him be gently used.

RICHARD
Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford,
Who not contented that he lopped the branch
In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
But set his murd'ring knife unto the root
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princely father, Duke of York.

WARWICK
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
Your father's head, which Clifford placed there;
Instead whereof let this supply the room.
Measure for measure must be answered.

EDWARD
Bring forth that fatal screech owl to our house
That nothing sung but death to us and ours;
Now death shall stop his dismal threat'ning sound,
And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.

WARWICK
I think his understanding is bereft.--
Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to
thee?--
Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.

RICHARD
O, would he did--and so, perhaps, he doth!
'Tis but his policy to counterfeit,
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our father.

GEORGE
If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.

RICHARD
Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.

EDWARD
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.

WARWICK
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.

GEORGE
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.

RICHARD
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.

EDWARD
Thou pitied'st Rutland; I will pity thee.

GEORGE
Where's Captain Margaret to fence you now?

WARWICK
They mock thee, Clifford; swear as thou wast wont.

RICHARD
What, not an oath? Nay, then, the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
I know by that he's dead; and, by my soul,
If this right hand would buy but two hours' life
That I in all despite might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off, and with the issuing
blood
Stifle the villain whose unstaunched thirst
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.

WARWICK
Ay, but he's dead. Off with the traitor's head,
And rear it in the place your father's stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned England's royal king,
From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France
And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen;
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together,
And having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
The scattered foe that hopes to rise again;
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
First will I see the coronation,
And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea
To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.

EDWARD
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;
For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.--
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,
And George, of Clarence. Warwick as ourself
Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.

RICHARD
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester,
For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.

WARWICK
Tut, that's a foolish observation.
Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,
To see these honors in possession.
[They exit, with Clifford's body.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter two Gamekeepers,
with crossbows in their hands.]


FIRST GAMEKEEPER
Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves,
For through this laund anon the deer will come;
And in this covert will we make our stand,
Culling the principal of all the deer.

SECOND GAMEKEEPER
I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.

FIRST GAMEKEEPER
That cannot be. The noise of thy crossbow
Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best.
And for the time shall not seem tedious,
I'll tell thee what befell me on a day
In this self place where now we mean to stand.

SECOND GAMEKEEPER
Here comes a man; let's stay till he be past.

[Enter King Henry, in disguise, with a prayer book.]


KING HENRY
From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love,
To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine!
Thy place is filled, thy scepter wrung from thee,
Thy balm washed off wherewith thou wast anointed.
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press to speak for right,
No, not a man comes for redress of thee;
For how can I help them an not myself?

FIRST GAMEKEEPER, [aside to Second Gamekeeper]
Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee.
This is the quondam king. Let's seize upon him.

KING HENRY
Let me embrace the sour adversaries,
For wise men say it is the wisest course.

SECOND GAMEKEEPER, [aside to First Gamekeeper]
Why linger we? Let us lay hands upon him.

FIRST GAMEKEEPER, [aside to Second Gamekeeper]
Forbear awhile; we'll hear a little more.

KING HENRY
My queen and son are gone to France for aid,
And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
Is thither gone to crave the French king's sister
To wife for Edward. If this news be true,
Poor queen and son, your labor is but lost,
For Warwick is a subtle orator,
And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
By this account, then, Margaret may win him,
For she's a woman to be pitied much.
Her sighs will make a batt'ry in his breast,
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart.
The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn,
And Nero will be tainted with remorse
To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give;
She on his left side craving aid for Henry;
He on his right asking a wife for Edward.
She weeps and says her Henry is deposed;
He smiles and says his Edward is installed;
That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more,
Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion wins the King from her
With promise of his sister and what else
To strengthen and support King Edward's place.
O Margaret, thus 'twill be, and thou, poor soul,
Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn.

SECOND GAMEKEEPER
Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?

KING HENRY
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
A man at least, for less I should not be;
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?

SECOND GAMEKEEPER
Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.

KING HENRY
Why, so I am in mind, and that's enough.

SECOND GAMEKEEPER
But if thou be a king, where is thy crown?

KING HENRY
My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,
Nor to be seen. My crown is called content;
A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.

SECOND GAMEKEEPER
Well, if you be a king crowned with content,
Your crown content and you must be contented
To go along with us. For, as we think,
You are the king King Edward hath deposed;
And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance
Will apprehend you as his enemy.

KING HENRY
But did you never swear and break an oath?

SECOND GAMEKEEPER
No, never such an oath, nor will not now.

KING HENRY
Where did you dwell when I was King of England?

SECOND GAMEKEEPER
Here in this country, where we now remain.

KING HENRY
I was anointed king at nine months old.
My father and my grandfather were kings,
And you were sworn true subjects unto me.
And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?

FIRST GAMEKEEPER
No, for we were subjects but while you were king.

KING HENRY
Why, am I dead? Do I not breathe a man?
Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear.
Look as I blow this feather from my face
And as the air blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust,
Such is the lightness of you common men.
But do not break your oaths, for of that sin
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the King shall be commanded,
And be you kings: command, and I'll obey.

FIRST GAMEKEEPER
We are true subjects to the King, King Edward.

KING HENRY
So would you be again to Henry
If he were seated as King Edward is.

FIRST GAMEKEEPER
We charge you in God's name and the King's
To go with us unto the officers.

KING HENRY
In God's name, lead. Your king's name be obeyed,
And what God will, that let your king perform.
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter King Edward, Richard, Duke of Gloucester,
George, Duke of Clarence, Lady Grey,
and Attendants.]


KING EDWARD
Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Albans field
This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
His land then seized on by the conqueror.
Her suit is now to repossess those lands,
Which we in justice cannot well deny,
Because in quarrel of the house of York
The worthy gentleman did lose his life.

RICHARD
Your Highness shall do well to grant her suit;
It were dishonor to deny it her.

KING EDWARD
It were no less, but yet I'll make a pause.

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]  Yea, is it so?
I see the lady hath a thing to grant
Before the King will grant her humble suit.

CLARENCE, [formerly GEORGE, aside to Richard]
He knows the game; how true he keeps the wind!

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]  Silence!

KING EDWARD
Widow, we will consider of your suit,
And come some other time to know our mind.

LADY GREY
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay.
May it please your Highness to resolve me now,
And what your pleasure is shall satisfy me.

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]
Ay, widow? Then I'll warrant you all your lands,
An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.
Fight closer, or, good faith, you'll catch a blow.

CLARENCE, [aside to Richard]
I fear her not, unless she chance to fall.

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]
God forbid that, for he'll take vantages.

KING EDWARD
How many children hast thou, widow? Tell me.

CLARENCE, [aside to Richard]
I think he means to beg a child of her.

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]
Nay, then, whip me; he'll rather give her two.

LADY GREY  Three, my most gracious lord.

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]
You shall have four if you'll be ruled by him.

KING EDWARD
'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.

LADY GREY
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.

KING EDWARD
Lords, give us leave. I'll try this widow's wit.
[Richard and Clarence stand aside.]

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]
Ay, good leave have you, for you will have leave
Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.

KING EDWARD
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?

LADY GREY
Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.

KING EDWARD
And would you not do much to do them good?

LADY GREY
To do them good I would sustain some harm.

KING EDWARD
Then get your husband's lands to do them good.

LADY GREY
Therefore I came unto your Majesty.

KING EDWARD
I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.

LADY GREY
So shall you bind me to your Highness' service.

KING EDWARD
What service wilt thou do me if I give them?

LADY GREY
What you command that rests in me to do.

KING EDWARD
But you will take exceptions to my boon.

LADY GREY
No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.

KING EDWARD
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.

LADY GREY
Why, then, I will do what your Grace commands.

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]
He plies her hard, and much rain wears the marble.

CLARENCE, [aside to Richard]
As red as fire! Nay, then, her wax must melt.

LADY GREY
Why stops my lord? Shall I not hear my task?

KING EDWARD
An easy task; 'tis but to love a king.

LADY GREY
That's soon performed because I am a subject.

KING EDWARD
Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.

LADY GREY
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.
[She curtsies and begins to exit.]

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]
The match is made; she seals it with a cursy.

KING EDWARD
But stay thee; 'tis the fruits of love I mean.

LADY GREY
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.

KING EDWARD
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get?

LADY GREY
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers,
That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.

KING EDWARD
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.

LADY GREY
Why, then, you mean not as I thought you did.

KING EDWARD
But now you partly may perceive my mind.

LADY GREY
My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your Highness aims at, if I aim aright.

KING EDWARD
To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.

LADY GREY
To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.

KING EDWARD
Why, then, thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.

LADY GREY
Why, then, mine honesty shall be my dower,
For by that loss I will not purchase them.

KING EDWARD
Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.

LADY GREY
Herein your Highness wrongs both them and me.
But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit.
Please you dismiss me either with ay or no.

KING EDWARD
Ay, if thou wilt say "ay" to my request;
No, if thou dost say "no" to my demand.

LADY GREY
Then no, my lord; my suit is at an end.

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]
The widow likes him not; she knits her brows.

CLARENCE, [aside to Richard]
He is the bluntest wooer in Christendom.

KING EDWARD, [aside]
Her looks doth argue her replete with modesty;
Her words doth show her wit incomparable;
All her perfections challenge sovereignty.
One way or other, she is for a king,
And she shall be my love or else my queen.--
Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?

LADY GREY
'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord.
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a sovereign.

KING EDWARD
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
I speak no more than what my soul intends,
And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.

LADY GREY
And that is more than I will yield unto.
I know I am too mean to be your queen
And yet too good to be your concubine.

KING EDWARD
You cavil, widow; I did mean my queen.

LADY GREY
'Twill grieve your Grace my sons should call you
father.

KING EDWARD
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
Thou art a widow and thou hast some children,
And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor,
Have other some. Why, 'tis a happy thing
To be the father unto many sons.
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.

RICHARD, [aside to Clarence]
The ghostly father now hath done his shrift.

CLARENCE, [aside to Richard]
When he was made a shriver, 'twas for shift.

KING EDWARD
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.

RICHARD
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.

KING EDWARD
You'd think it strange if I should marry her.

CLARENCE
To who, my lord?

KING EDWARD  Why, Clarence, to myself.

RICHARD
That would be ten days' wonder at the least.

CLARENCE
That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.

RICHARD
By so much is the wonder in extremes.

KING EDWARD
Well, jest on, brothers. I can tell you both
Her suit is granted for her husband's lands.

[Enter a Nobleman.]


NOBLEMAN
My gracious lord, Henry, your foe, is taken
And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.

KING EDWARD
See that he be conveyed unto the Tower.
[Nobleman exits.]
And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.--
Widow, go you along.--Lords, use her honorably.
[They exit.
Richard remains.]

RICHARD
Ay, Edward will use women honorably!
Would he were wasted--marrow, bones, and all--
That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring
To cross me from the golden time I look for.
And yet, between my soul's desire and me,
The lustful Edward's title buried,
Is Clarence, Henry, and his son, young Edward,
And all the unlooked-for issue of their bodies
To take their rooms ere I can place myself.
A cold premeditation for my purpose.
Why, then, I do but dream on sovereignty
Like one that stands upon a promontory
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying he'll lade it dry to have his way.
So do I wish the crown, being so far off,
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it,
And so, I say, I'll cut the causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities.
My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,
Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard,
What other pleasure can the world afford?
I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap
And deck my body in gay ornaments,
And 'witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
O miserable thought, and more unlikely
Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns!
Why, Love forswore me in my mother's womb,
And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
She did corrupt frail Nature with some bribe
To shrink mine arm up like a withered shrub;
To make an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits Deformity to mock my body;
To shape my legs of an unequal size;
To disproportion me in every part,
Like to a chaos, or an unlicked bear-whelp,
That carries no impression like the dam.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
O monstrous fault to harbor such a thought!
Then, since this Earth affords no joy to me
But to command, to check, to o'erbear such
As are of better person than myself,
I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
And, whiles I live, t' account this world but hell
Until my misshaped trunk that bears this head
Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And yet I know not how to get the crown,
For many lives stand between me and home;
And I, like one lost in a thorny wood,
That rents the thorns and is rent with the thorns,
Seeking a way and straying from the way,
Not knowing how to find the open air,
But toiling desperately to find it out,
Torment myself to catch the English crown.
And from that torment I will free myself
Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
And cry "Content" to that which grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,
And frame my face to all occasions.
I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall;
I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk;
I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slyly than Ulysses could,
And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
I can add colors to the chameleon,
Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,
And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
Can I do this and cannot get a crown?
Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Flourish. Enter Lewis the French king, his sister
the Lady Bona, his Admiral called Bourbon,
Prince Edward, Queen Margaret, and the Earl of Oxford,
the last three wearing the red rose.]

[Lewis sits, and riseth up again.]



KING LEWIS
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us. It ill befits thy state
And birth that thou shouldst stand while Lewis
doth sit.

QUEEN MARGARET
No, mighty King of France. Now Margaret
Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve
Where kings command. I was, I must confess,
Great Albion's queen in former golden days,
But now mischance hath trod my title down
And with dishonor laid me on the ground,
Where I must take like seat unto my fortune
And to my humble seat conform myself.

KING LEWIS
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep
despair?

QUEEN MARGARET
From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
And stops my tongue, while heart is drowned in cares.

KING LEWIS
Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,
And sit thee by our side.	[Seats her by him.]
Yield not thy neck
To Fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
Still ride in triumph over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief.
It shall be eased if France can yield relief.

QUEEN MARGARET
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
Now therefore be it known to noble Lewis
That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
Is, of a king, become a banished man
And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn;
While proud ambitious Edward, Duke of York,
Usurps the regal title and the seat
Of England's true-anointed lawful king.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done.
Scotland hath will to help but cannot help;
Our people and our peers are both misled,
Our treasure seized, our soldiers put to flight,
And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.

KING LEWIS
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm
While we bethink a means to break it off.

QUEEN MARGARET
The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.

KING LEWIS
The more I stay, the more I'll succor thee.

QUEEN MARGARET
O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.

[Enter Warwick, wearing the white rose.]

And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow.

KING LEWIS
What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?

QUEEN MARGARET
Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.

KING LEWIS, [standing]
Welcome, brave Warwick. What brings thee to France?
[He descends. She ariseth.]

QUEEN MARGARET, [aside]
Ay, now begins a second storm to rise,
For this is he that moves both wind and tide.

WARWICK
From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
My lord and sovereign and thy vowed friend,
I come in kindness and unfeigned love,
First, to do greetings to thy royal person,
And then to crave a league of amity,
And, lastly, to confirm that amity
With nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
To England's king in lawful marriage.

QUEEN MARGARET, [aside]
If that go forward, Henry's hope is done.

WARWICK, [speaking to Lady Bona]
And, gracious madam, in our king's behalf,
I am commanded, with your leave and favor,
Humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue
To tell the passion of my sovereign's heart,
Where fame, late ent'ring at his heedful ears,
Hath placed thy beauty's image and thy virtue.

QUEEN MARGARET
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,
But from deceit, bred by necessity;
For how can tyrants safely govern home
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him tyrant, this reason may suffice:
That Henry liveth still; but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.
Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and
marriage
Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonor;
For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Yet heav'ns are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.

WARWICK
Injurious Margaret!

PRINCE EDWARD  And why not "Queen"?

WARWICK
Because thy father Henry did usurp,
And thou no more art prince than she is queen.

OXFORD
Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
And after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
And after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his prowess conquered all France.
From these our Henry lineally descends.

WARWICK
Oxford, how haps it in this smooth discourse
You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost
All that which Henry the Fifth had gotten.
Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
But, for the rest: you tell a pedigree
Of threescore and two years, a silly time
To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.

OXFORD
Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy treason with a blush?

WARWICK
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
For shame, leave Henry, and call Edward king.

OXFORD
Call him my king, by whose injurious doom
My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
Was done to death? And more than so, my father,
Even in the downfall of his mellowed years,
When nature brought him to the door of death?
No, Warwick, no. While life upholds this arm,
This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.

WARWICK  And I the house of York.

KING LEWIS
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside
While I use further conference with Warwick.
[They stand aloof.]

QUEEN MARGARET, [aside]
Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him
not.

KING LEWIS
Now, Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
Is Edward your true king? For I were loath
To link with him that were not lawful chosen.

WARWICK
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honor.

KING LEWIS
But is he gracious in the people's eye?

WARWICK
The more that Henry was unfortunate.

KING LEWIS
Then further, all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth the measure of his love
Unto our sister Bona.

WARWICK  Such it seems
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
Myself have often heard him say and swear
That this his love was an eternal plant,
Whereof the root was fixed in virtue's ground,
The leaves and fruit maintained with beauty's sun,
Exempt from envy but not from disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.

KING LEWIS
Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.

LADY BONA
Your grant or your denial shall be mine.
[(Speaks to Warwick.)] Yet I confess that often ere this
day,
When I have heard your king's desert recounted,
Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.

KING LEWIS
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's.
And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
Touching the jointure that your king must make,
Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.--
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
That Bona shall be wife to the English king.

PRINCE EDWARD
To Edward, but not to the English king.

QUEEN MARGARET
Deceitful Warwick, it was thy device
By this alliance to make void my suit.
Before thy coming, Lewis was Henry's friend.

KING LEWIS
And still is friend to him and Margaret.
But if your title to the crown be weak,
As may appear by Edward's good success,
Then 'tis but reason that I be released
From giving aid which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
That your estate requires and mine can yield.

WARWICK
Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,
Where, having nothing, nothing can he lose.--
And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
You have a father able to maintain you,
And better 'twere you troubled him than France.

QUEEN MARGARET
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick,
Proud setter-up and puller-down of kings!
I will not hence till with my talk and tears,
Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love,
For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.
[Post blowing a horn within.]

KING LEWIS
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.

[Enter the Post.]


POST [speaks to Warwick.]
My lord ambassador, these letters are for you,
Sent from your brother, Marquess Montague.
[(To Lewis.)] These from our king unto your Majesty.
[(To Margaret.)] And, madam, these for you--from
whom, I know not.	[They all read their letters.]

OXFORD, [aside]
I like it well that our fair queen and mistress
Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.

PRINCE EDWARD, [aside]
Nay, mark how Lewis stamps as he were nettled.
I hope all's for the best.

KING LEWIS
Warwick, what are thy news? And yours, fair queen?

QUEEN MARGARET
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.

WARWICK
Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.

KING LEWIS
What, has your king married the Lady Grey,
And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
Is this th' alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?

QUEEN MARGARET
I told your Majesty as much before.
This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.

WARWICK
King Lewis, I here protest in sight of heaven
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's--
No more my king, for he dishonors me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget that by the house of York
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass th' abuse done to my niece?
Did I impale him with the regal crown?
Did I put Henry from his native right?
And am I guerdoned at the last with shame?
Shame on himself, for my desert is honor!
And to repair my honor lost for him,
I here renounce him and return to Henry.
[He removes the white rose.]
My noble queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth I am thy true servitor.
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona
And replant Henry in his former state.

QUEEN MARGARET
Warwick, these words have turned my hate to love,
And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou becom'st King Henry's friend.

WARWICK
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,
That if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
I'll undertake to land them on our coast
And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
'Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him.
And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
He's very likely now to fall from him
For matching more for wanton lust than honor,
Or than for strength and safety of our country.

LADY BONA
Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged
But by thy help to this distressed queen?

QUEEN MARGARET
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?

LADY BONA
My quarrel and this English queen's are one.

WARWICK
And mine, fair Lady Bona, joins with yours.

KING LEWIS
And mine with hers and thine and Margaret's.
Therefore at last I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.

QUEEN MARGARET
Let me give humble thanks for all, at once.

KING LEWIS
Then, England's messenger, return in post,
And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over maskers
To revel it with him and his new bride.
Thou seest what's passed; go fear thy king withal.

LADY BONA
Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I wear the willow garland for his sake.

QUEEN MARGARET
Tell him my mourning weeds are laid aside
And I am ready to put armor on.

WARWICK
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere 't be long.
There's thy reward.	[Gives money.]
Be gone.	[Post exits.]

KING LEWIS  But, Warwick,
Thou and Oxford with five thousand men
Shall cross the seas and bid false Edward battle;
And as occasion serves, this noble queen
And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
Yet ere thou go, but answer me one doubt:
What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?

WARWICK
This shall assure my constant loyalty:
That if our queen and this young prince agree,
I'll join mine eldest daughter, and my joy,
To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.

QUEEN MARGARET
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous.
Therefore, delay not; give thy hand to Warwick,
And with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.

PRINCE EDWARD
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it,
And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.
[He gives his hand to Warwick.]

KING LEWIS
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou, Lord Bourbon, our High Admiral,
Shall waft them over with our royal fleet.
I long till Edward fall by war's mischance
For mocking marriage with a dame of France.

[All but Warwick exit.]

WARWICK
I came from Edward as ambassador,
But I return his sworn and mortal foe.
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
I was the chief that raised him to the crown,
And I'll be chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.
[He exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Richard of Gloucester, Clarence, Somerset,
and Montague, all wearing the white rose.]


RICHARD
Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?

CLARENCE
Alas, you know 'tis far from hence to France.
How could he stay till Warwick made return?
[Flourish.]

SOMERSET
My lords, forbear this talk. Here comes the King.

RICHARD  And his well-chosen bride.

CLARENCE
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.

[Enter King Edward, with Attendants,
Lady Grey, now Queen Elizabeth, Pembroke, Stafford,
Hastings, and others, all wearing the white rose.
Four stand on one side, and four on the other.]


KING EDWARD
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,
That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?

CLARENCE
As well as Lewis of France or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
That they'll take no offense at our abuse.

KING EDWARD
Suppose they take offense without a cause,
They are but Lewis and Warwick; I am Edward,
Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will.

RICHARD
And shall have your will because our king.
Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.

KING EDWARD
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?

RICHARD  Not I.
No, God forbid that I should wish them severed
Whom God hath joined together. Ay, and 'twere pity
To sunder them that yoke so well together.

KING EDWARD
Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
Should not become my wife and England's queen?
And you too, Somerset and Montague,
Speak freely what you think.

CLARENCE
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy for mocking him
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.

RICHARD
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dishonored by this new marriage.

KING EDWARD
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased
By such invention as I can devise?

MONTAGUE
Yet to have joined with France in such alliance
Would more have strengthened this our
commonwealth
'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.

HASTINGS
Why, knows not Montague that of itself
England is safe, if true within itself?

MONTAGUE
But the safer when 'tis backed with France.

HASTINGS
'Tis better using France than trusting France.
Let us be backed with God and with the seas
Which He hath giv'n for fence impregnable,
And with their helps only defend ourselves.
In them and in ourselves our safety lies.

CLARENCE
For this one speech, Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.

KING EDWARD
Ay, what of that? It was my will and grant,
And for this once my will shall stand for law.

RICHARD
And yet methinks your Grace hath not done well
To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the brother of your loving bride.
She better would have fitted me or Clarence;
But in your bride you bury brotherhood.

CLARENCE
Or else you would not have bestowed the heir
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.

KING EDWARD
Alas, poor Clarence, is it for a wife
That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.

CLARENCE
In choosing for yourself you showed your judgment,
Which, being shallow, you shall give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf.
And to that end, I shortly mind to leave you.

KING EDWARD
Leave me or tarry, Edward will be king
And not be tied unto his brother's will.

QUEEN ELIZABETH
My lords, before it pleased his Majesty
To raise my state to title of a queen,
Do me but right and you must all confess
That I was not ignoble of descent,
And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
But as this title honors me and mine,
So your dislikes, to whom I would be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.

KING EDWARD
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns.
What danger or what sorrow can befall thee
So long as Edward is thy constant friend
And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.

RICHARD, [aside]
I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.

[Enter a Post.]


KING EDWARD
Now, messenger, what letters or what news from
France?

POST
My sovereign liege, no letters and few words
But such as I without your special pardon
Dare not relate.

KING EDWARD
Go to, we pardon thee. Therefore, in brief,
Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?

POST
At my depart, these were his very words:
"Go tell false Edward, the supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over maskers
To revel it with him and his new bride."

KING EDWARD
Is Lewis so brave? Belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?

POST
These were her words, uttered with mild disdain:
"Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake."

KING EDWARD
I blame not her; she could say little less;
She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen?
For I have heard that she was there in place.

POST
"Tell him," quoth she, "my mourning weeds are
done,
And I am ready to put armor on."

KING EDWARD
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?

POST
He, more incensed against your Majesty
Than all the rest, discharged me with these words:
"Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere 't be long."

KING EDWARD
Ha! Durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
Well, I will arm me, being thus forewarned.
They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?

POST
Ay, gracious sovereign, they are so linked in
friendship
That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's
daughter.

CLARENCE, [aside]
Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.--
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter,
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
I may not prove inferior to yourself.
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.
[Clarence exits, and Somerset follows.]

RICHARD, [aside]
Not I. My thoughts aim at a further matter:
I stay not for the love of Edward, but the crown.

KING EDWARD
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick?
Yet am I armed against the worst can happen,
And haste is needful in this desp'rate case.
Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men and make prepare for war.
They are already, or quickly will be, landed.
Myself in person will straight follow you.
[Pembroke and Stafford exit.]
But ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
Resolve my doubt: you twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance.
Tell me if you love Warwick more than me.
If it be so, then both depart to him.
I rather wish you foes than hollow friends.
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.

MONTAGUE
So God help Montague as he proves true!

HASTINGS
And Hastings as he favors Edward's cause!

KING EDWARD
Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?

RICHARD
Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.

KING EDWARD
Why, so. Then am I sure of victory.
Now therefore let us hence and lose no hour
Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Warwick and Oxford in England,
wearing the red rose, with French Soldiers.]


WARWICK
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well.
The common people by numbers swarm to us.

[Enter Clarence and Somerset.]

But see where Somerset and Clarence comes.--
Speak suddenly, my lords: are we all friends?

CLARENCE  Fear not that, my lord.

WARWICK
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick,
And welcome, Somerset. I hold it cowardice
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
Hath pawned an open hand in sign of love;
Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings.
But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be
thine.
And now, what rests but, in night's coverture
Thy brother being carelessly encamped,
His soldiers lurking in the town about,
And but attended by a simple guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy;
That, as Ulysses and stout Diomed
With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus' tents
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
So we, well covered with the night's black mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edward's guard
And seize himself. I say not "slaughter him,"
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
[They all cry "Henry!"]
Why then, let's on our way in silent sort.
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter three Watchmen to guard King Edward's tent,
all wearing the white rose.]


FIRST WATCH
Come on, my masters, each man take his stand.
The King by this is set him down to sleep.

SECOND WATCH  What, will he not to bed?

FIRST WATCH
Why, no, for he hath made a solemn vow
Never to lie and take his natural rest
Till Warwick or himself be quite suppressed.

SECOND WATCH
Tomorrow, then, belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.

THIRD WATCH
But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
That with the King here resteth in his tent?

FIRST WATCH
'Tis the Lord Hastings, the King's chiefest friend.

THIRD WATCH
O, is it so? But why commands the King
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?

SECOND WATCH
'Tis the more honor, because more dangerous.

THIRD WATCH
Ay, but give me worship and quietness;
I like it better than a dangerous honor.
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.

FIRST WATCH
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.

SECOND WATCH
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent
But to defend his person from night foes?

[Enter Warwick, Clarence, Oxford, Somerset, all wearing
the red rose, and French Soldiers, silent all.]


WARWICK
This is his tent, and see where stand his guard.
Courage, my masters. Honor, now or never!
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.

FIRST WATCH  Who goes there?

SECOND WATCH  Stay, or thou diest!
[Warwick and the rest cry all "Warwick, Warwick!"
and set upon the guard, who fly, crying "Arm, Arm!"
Warwick and the rest following them.]

[The drum playing and trumpet sounding,
enter Warwick, Somerset, and the rest, bringing
King Edward out in his gown, sitting in a chair.
Richard and Hastings flies over the stage.]


SOMERSET
What are they that fly there?

WARWICK  Richard and Hastings.
Let them go. Here is the Duke.

KING EDWARD  The Duke?
Why, Warwick, when we parted, thou call'dst me king.

WARWICK  Ay, but the case is altered.
When you disgraced me in my embassade,
Then I degraded you from being king
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas, how should you govern any kingdom
That know not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one wife,
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
Nor how to study for the people's welfare,
Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?

KING EDWARD
Yea, brother of Clarence, art thou here too?
Nay, then, I see that Edward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,
Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
Edward will always bear himself as king.
Though Fortune's malice overthrow my state,
My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.

WARWICK
Then for his mind be Edward England's king,
[Takes off his crown.]
But Henry now shall wear the English crown
And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.--
My lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be conveyed
Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
I'll follow you and tell what answer
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.--
Now for awhile farewell, good Duke of York.

[They begin to lead him out forcibly.]

KING EDWARD
What Fates impose, that men must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.
[Somerset and Soldiers exit, guarding King Edward.]

OXFORD
What now remains, my lords, for us to do
But march to London with our soldiers?

WARWICK
Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do,
To free King Henry from imprisonment
And see him seated in the regal throne.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Rivers and Queen Elizabeth,
wearing the white rose.]


RIVERS
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?

QUEEN ELIZABETH
Why, brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befall'n King Edward?

RIVERS
What, loss of some pitched battle against Warwick?

QUEEN ELIZABETH
No, but the loss of his own royal person.

RIVERS  Then is my sovereign slain?

QUEEN ELIZABETH
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betrayed by falsehood of his guard
Or by his foe surprised at unawares;
And, as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwick's brother and by that our foe.

RIVERS
These news I must confess are full of grief;
Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may.
Warwick may lose that now hath won the day.

QUEEN ELIZABETH
Till then fair hope must hinder life's decay;
And I the rather wean me from despair
For love of Edward's offspring in my womb.
This is it that makes me bridle passion
And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross.
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
King Edward's fruit, true heir to th' English crown.

RIVERS
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?

QUEEN ELIZABETH
I am informed that he comes towards London
To set the crown once more on Henry's head.
Guess thou the rest: King Edward's friends must
down.
But to prevent the tyrant's violence--
For trust not him that hath once broken faith--
I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary
To save at least the heir of Edward's right.
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly.
If Warwick take us, we are sure to die.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Richard of Gloucester, Lord Hastings,
and Sir William Stanley, with Soldiers,
all wearing the white rose.]


RICHARD
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither
Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
Thus stands the case: you know our king, my brother,
Is prisoner to the Bishop here, at whose hands
He hath good usage and great liberty,
And, often but attended with weak guard,
Comes hunting this way to disport himself.
I have advertised him by secret means
That, if about this hour he make this way
Under the color of his usual game,
He shall here find his friends with horse and men
To set him free from his captivity.

[Enter King Edward, wearing the white rose,
and a Huntsman with him.]


HUNTSMAN
This way, my lord, for this way lies the game.

KING EDWARD
Nay, this way, man. See where the huntsmen stand.--
Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the
rest,
Stand you thus close to steal the Bishop's deer?

RICHARD
Brother, the time and case requireth haste.
Your horse stands ready at the park corner.

KING EDWARD  But whither shall we then?

HASTINGS
To Lynn, my lord, and shipped from thence
to Flanders.

RICHARD
Well guessed, believe me, for that was my meaning.

KING EDWARD
Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.

RICHARD
But wherefore stay we? 'Tis no time to talk.

KING EDWARD
Huntsman, what sayst thou? Wilt thou go along?

HUNTSMAN
Better do so than tarry and be hanged.

RICHARD
Come then, away! Let's ha' no more ado.

KING EDWARD
Bishop, farewell; shield thee from Warwick's frown,
And pray that I may repossess the crown.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Flourish. Enter King Henry the Sixth, Clarence,
Warwick, Somerset, young Henry Earl of Richmond,
Oxford, Montague, all wearing the red rose,
and Lieutenant of the Tower.]


KING HENRY
Master lieutenant, now that God and friends
Have shaken Edward from the regal seat
And turned my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees?

LIEUTENANT
Subjects may challenge nothing of their sov'reigns,
But, if an humble prayer may prevail,
I then crave pardon of your Majesty.

KING HENRY
For what, lieutenant? For well using me?
Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness,
For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure,
Ay, such a pleasure as encaged birds
Conceive when, after many moody thoughts,
At last by notes of household harmony
They quite forget their loss of liberty.--
But, Warwick, after God thou sett'st me free,
And chiefly, therefore, I thank God and thee.
He was the author, thou the instrument.
Therefore, that I may conquer Fortune's spite
By living low where Fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed land
May not be punished with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
I here resign my government to thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.

WARWICK
Your Grace hath still been famed for virtuous
And now may seem as wise as virtuous
By spying and avoiding Fortune's malice,
For few men rightly temper with the stars.
Yet, in this one thing let me blame your Grace:
For choosing me when Clarence is in place.

CLARENCE
No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the heav'ns in thy nativity
Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown
As likely to be blest in peace and war;
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.

WARWICK
And I choose Clarence only for Protector.

KING HENRY
Warwick and Clarence, give me both your hands.
Now join your hands, and with your hands your
hearts,
That no dissension hinder government.

[He joins their hands.]
I make you both Protectors of this land,
While I myself will lead a private life
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise.

WARWICK
What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?

CLARENCE
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,
For on thy fortune I repose myself.

WARWICK
Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content.
We'll yoke together like a double shadow
To Henry's body, and supply his place--
I mean, in bearing weight of government--
While he enjoys the honor and his ease.
And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor
And all his lands and goods be confiscate.

CLARENCE
What else? And that succession be determined.

WARWICK
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.

KING HENRY
But with the first of all your chief affairs
Let me entreat--for I command no more--
That Margaret your queen and my son Edward
Be sent for, to return from France with speed,
For till I see them here, by doubtful fear
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.

CLARENCE
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.

KING HENRY
My lord of Somerset, what youth is that
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?

SOMERSET
My liege, it is young Henry, Earl of Richmond.

KING HENRY, [to Richmond]
Come hither, England's hope.
[Lays his hand on Richmond's head.]
If secret powers
Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.
His looks are full of peaceful majesty,
His head by nature framed to wear a crown,
His hand to wield a scepter, and himself
Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
Make much of him, my lords, for this is he
Must help you more than you are hurt by me.

[Enter a Post.]


WARWICK  What news, my friend?

POST
That Edward is escaped from your brother
And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.

WARWICK
Unsavory news! But how made he escape?

POST
He was conveyed by Richard, Duke of Gloucester,
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush on the forest side
And from the Bishop's huntsmen rescued him,
For hunting was his daily exercise.

WARWICK
My brother was too careless of his charge.
But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore that may betide.
[All but Somerset, Richmond, and Oxford exit.]

SOMERSET, [to Oxford]
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's,
For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more wars before 't be long.
As Henry's late presaging prophecy
Did glad my heart with hope of this young
Richmond,
So doth my heart misgive me in these conflicts
What may befall him, to his harm and ours.
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany
Till storms be past of civil enmity.

OXFORD
Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
'Tis like that Richmond, with the rest, shall down.

SOMERSET
It shall be so. He shall to Brittany.
Come, therefore, let's about it speedily.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Flourish. Enter King Edward, Richard, Hastings,
and Soldiers, all wearing the white rose.]


KING EDWARD
Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest:
Yet thus far Fortune maketh us amends,
And says that once more I shall interchange
My waned state for Henry's regal crown.
Well have we passed, and now re-passed, the seas,
And brought desired help from Burgundy.
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Ravenspurgh Haven before the gates of York,
But that we enter as into our dukedom?
[Hastings knocks at the gate.]

RICHARD
The gates made fast? Brother, I like not this.
For many men that stumble at the threshold
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.

KING EDWARD
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us.
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to us.

HASTINGS
My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.
[He knocks.]

[Enter on the walls the Mayor of York and his brethren,
the Aldermen.]


MAYOR
My lords, we were forewarned of your coming,
And shut the gates for safety of ourselves,
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.

KING EDWARD
But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,
Yet Edward, at the least, is Duke of York.

MAYOR
True, my good lord, I know you for no less.

KING EDWARD
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.

RICHARD, [aside]
But when the fox hath once got in his nose,
He'll soon find means to make the body follow.

HASTINGS
Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the gates. We are King Henry's friends.

MAYOR
Ay, say you so? The gates shall then be opened.
[He descends with the Aldermen.]

RICHARD
A wise stout captain, and soon persuaded.

HASTINGS
The good old man would fain that all were well,
So 'twere not long of him; but being entered,
I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
Both him and all his brothers unto reason.

[Enter the Mayor and two Aldermen.]


KING EDWARD
So, master mayor, these gates must not be shut
But in the night or in the time of war.
What, fear not, man, but yield me up the keys.
[Takes his keys.]
For Edward will defend the town and thee
And all those friends that deign to follow me.

[March. Enter Montgomery, with Drum and Soldiers.]


RICHARD
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.

KING EDWARD
Welcome, Sir John. But why come you in arms?

MONTGOMERY
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal subject ought to do.

KING EDWARD
Thanks, good Montgomery. But we now forget
Our title to the crown, and only claim
Our dukedom, till God please to send the rest.

MONTGOMERY
Then fare you well, for I will hence again.
I came to serve a king and not a duke.--
Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.
[The Drum begins to march.]

KING EDWARD
Nay, stay, Sir John, a while, and we'll debate
By what safe means the crown may be recovered.

MONTGOMERY
What talk you of debating? In few words,
If you'll not here proclaim yourself our king,
I'll leave you to your fortune and be gone
To keep them back that come to succor you.
Why shall we fight if you pretend no title?

RICHARD
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?

KING EDWARD
When we grow stronger, then we'll make our claim.
Till then 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.

HASTINGS
Away with scrupulous wit! Now arms must rule.

RICHARD
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand;
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.

KING EDWARD
Then be it as you will, for 'tis my right,
And Henry but usurps the diadem.

MONTGOMERY
Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself,
And now will I be Edward's champion.

HASTINGS
Sound, trumpet! Edward shall be here proclaimed.--
Come, fellow soldier, make thou proclamation.
[Flourish. Sound.]

SOLDIER [reads]  Edward the Fourth, by the Grace of
God, King of England and France, and Lord of
Ireland, &c.

MONTGOMERY
And whosoe'er gainsays King Edward's right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.
[Throws down his gauntlet.]

ALL  Long live Edward the Fourth!

KING EDWARD
Thanks, brave Montgomery, and thanks unto you all.
If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.
Now, for this night let's harbor here in York,
And when the morning sun shall raise his car
Above the border of this horizon,
We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates;
For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
Ah, froward Clarence, how evil it beseems thee
To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on, brave soldiers; doubt not of the day;
And that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
[They exit.]

Scene 8
=======
[Flourish. Enter King Henry, Warwick, Montague,
Clarence, Oxford, and Exeter, all wearing the red rose.]


WARWICK
What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Hath passed in safety through the Narrow Seas,
And with his troops doth march amain to London,
And many giddy people flock to him.

KING HENRY
Let's levy men and beat him back again.

CLARENCE
A little fire is quickly trodden out,
Which, being suffered, rivers cannot quench.

WARWICK
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace yet bold in war.
Those will I muster up; and thou, son Clarence,
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent
The knights and gentlemen to come with thee.--
Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
Northampton, and in Leicestershire shalt find
Men well inclined to hear what thou command'st.--
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.--
My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
Like to his island girt in with the ocean,
Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair lords, take leave, and stand not to reply.--
Farewell, my sovereign.

KING HENRY
Farewell, my Hector and my Troy's true hope.

CLARENCE
In sign of truth, I kiss your Highness' hand.

KING HENRY
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate.

MONTAGUE
Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.

OXFORD
And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.
[He kisses Henry's hand.]

KING HENRY
Sweet Oxford and my loving Montague
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.

WARWICK
Farewell, sweet lords. Let's meet at Coventry.
[All but King Henry and Exeter exit.]

KING HENRY
Here at the palace will I rest awhile.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your Lordship?
Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
Should not be able to encounter mine.

EXETER
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.

KING HENRY
That's not my fear. My meed hath got me fame.
I have not stopped mine ears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suits with slow delays.
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness hath allayed their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears.
I have not been desirous of their wealth
Nor much oppressed them with great subsidies,
Nor forward of revenge, though they much erred.
Then why should they love Edward more than me?
No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace;
And when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
The lamb will never cease to follow him.
[Shout within "A York! A York!"]

EXETER
Hark, hark, my lord, what shouts are these?

[Enter King Edward and Richard and Soldiers,
all wearing the white rose.]


KING EDWARD
Seize on the shamefaced Henry, bear him hence,
And once again proclaim us King of England.--
You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow.
Now stops thy spring; my sea shall suck them dry
And swell so much the higher by their ebb.--
Hence with him to the Tower. Let him not speak.
[Soldiers exit with King Henry and Exeter.]
And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course,
Where peremptory Warwick now remains.
The sun shines hot, and if we use delay,
Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.

RICHARD
Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-grown traitor unawares.
Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Warwick, wearing the red rose, the Mayor of
Coventry, two Messengers, and others, upon the walls.]


WARWICK
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?--
How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?

FIRST MESSENGER
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.
[He exits.]

WARWICK
How far off is our brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?

SECOND MESSENGER
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.	[He exits.]

[Enter, upon the walls, Somerville
wearing the red rose.]


WARWICK
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?

SOMERVILLE
At Southam I did leave him with his forces
And do expect him here some two hours hence.
[Drum offstage.]

WARWICK
Then Clarence is at hand; I hear his drum.

SOMERVILLE
It is not his, my lord; here Southam lies.
The drum your Honor hears marcheth from Warwick.

WARWICK
Who should that be? Belike unlooked-for friends.

SOMERVILLE
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.

[March. Flourish. Enter below, King Edward,
Richard, and Soldiers, including a Trumpeter,
all wearing the white rose.]


KING EDWARD
Go, Trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.

RICHARD
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall.

WARWICK
O unbid spite, is sportful Edward come?
Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair?

KING EDWARD
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
Speak gentle words, and humbly bend thy knee?
Call Edward king, and at his hands beg mercy,
And he shall pardon thee these outrages.

WARWICK
Nay, rather wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up and plucked thee down,
Call Warwick patron, and be penitent,
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.

RICHARD
I thought at least he would have said "the King."
Or did he make the jest against his will?

WARWICK
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?

RICHARD
Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give.
I'll do thee service for so good a gift.

WARWICK
'Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.

KING EDWARD
Why, then, 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.

WARWICK
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight;
And, weakling, Warwick takes his gift again,
And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.

KING EDWARD
But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner.
And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
What is the body when the head is off?

RICHARD
Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
But whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
The King was slyly fingered from the deck.
You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
And ten to one you'll meet him in the Tower.

KING EDWARD
'Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.

RICHARD
Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel
down.
Nay, when? Strike now, or else the iron cools.

WARWICK
I had rather chop this hand off at a blow
And with the other fling it at thy face
Than bear so low a sail to strike to thee.

KING EDWARD
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair,
Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood:
"Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more."

[Enter Oxford, below, wearing the red rose,
with Soldiers, Drum and Colors.]


WARWICK
O, cheerful colors, see where Oxford comes!

OXFORD  Oxford, Oxford for Lancaster!
[Oxford and his troops exit as through a city gate.]

RICHARD
The gates are open; let us enter too.

KING EDWARD
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array, for they no doubt
Will issue out again and bid us battle.
If not, the city being but of small defense,
We'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.

[Oxford enters aloft.]


WARWICK
O welcome, Oxford, for we want thy help.

[Enter Montague, below, wearing the red rose,
with Soldiers, Drum and Colors.]


MONTAGUE  Montague, Montague for Lancaster!

RICHARD
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear!
[Montague and his troops exit as through a city gate.]

KING EDWARD
The harder matched, the greater victory.
My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.

[Enter Somerset, below, wearing the red rose,
with Soldiers, Drum and Colors.]


SOMERSET  Somerset, Somerset for Lancaster!

RICHARD
Two of thy name, both dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York,
And thou shalt be the third, if this sword hold.
[Somerset and his troops exit as through a city gate.]

[Enter Clarence, below, wearing the red rose,
with Soldiers, Drum and Colors.]


WARWICK
And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid his brother battle,
With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
More than the nature of a brother's love.--
Come, Clarence, come; thou wilt, if Warwick call.

CLARENCE
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
[He removes the red rose.]
Look, here I throw my infamy at thee.
[He throws the rose at Warwick.]
I will not ruinate my father's house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together
And set up Lancaster. Why, trowest thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Against his brother and his lawful king?
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath.
To keep that oath were more impiety
Than Jephthah when he sacrificed his daughter.
I am so sorry for my trespass made
That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe,
With resolution, wheresoe'er I meet thee--
As I will meet thee if thou stir abroad--
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.--
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends.--
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.

KING EDWARD
Now, welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.

RICHARD
Welcome, good Clarence; this is brother-like.

WARWICK
O, passing traitor, perjured and unjust.

KING EDWARD
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?

WARWICK
Alas, I am not cooped here for defense.
I will away towards Barnet presently
And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou dar'st.

KING EDWARD
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.--
[Warwick exits from the walls and descends.]
Lords, to the field! Saint George and victory!
[They exit. March. Warwick and his company follows.]

Scene 2
=======
[Alarum and excursions. Enter King Edward,
wearing the white rose, bringing forth Warwick,
wearing the red rose, wounded.]


KING EDWARD
So, lie thou there. Die thou, and die our fear,
For Warwick was a bug that feared us all.
Now, Montague, sit fast. I seek for thee,
That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.
[He exits.]

WARWICK
Ah, who is nigh? Come to me, friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? My mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows
That I must yield my body to the earth
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Whose top branch overpeered Jove's spreading tree
And kept low shrubs from winter's pow'rful wind.
These eyes, that now are dimmed with death's black
veil,
Have been as piercing as the midday sun
To search the secret treasons of the world.
The wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood,
Were likened oft to kingly sepulchers,
For who lived king but I could dig his grave?
And who durst smile when Warwick bent his brow?
Lo, now my glory smeared in dust and blood!
My parks, my walks, my manors that I had
Even now forsake me; and of all my lands
Is nothing left me but my body's length.
Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
And live we how we can, yet die we must.

[Enter Oxford and Somerset, both wearing the red rose.]


SOMERSET
Ah, Warwick, Warwick, wert thou as we are,
We might recover all our loss again.
The Queen from France hath brought a puissant
power;
Even now we heard the news. Ah, could'st thou fly--

WARWICK
Why, then, I would not fly. Ah, Montague,
If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand
And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile.
Thou lov'st me not, for, brother, if thou didst,
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
That glues my lips and will not let me speak.
Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.

SOMERSET
Ah, Warwick, Montague hath breathed his last,
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
And said "Commend me to my valiant brother."
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a cannon in a vault,
That mought not be distinguished, but at last
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
"O, farewell, Warwick."

WARWICK
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves,
For Warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.
[He dies.]

OXFORD
Away, away, to meet the Queen's great power!
[Here they bear away his body. They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Flourish. Enter King Edward in triumph, with Richard,
Clarence, and the rest, all wearing the white rose.]


KING EDWARD
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
But in the midst of this bright-shining day,
I spy a black suspicious threat'ning cloud
That will encounter with our glorious sun
Ere he attain his easeful western bed.
I mean, my lords, those powers that the Queen
Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast
And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.

CLARENCE
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
And blow it to the source from whence it came;
Thy very beams will dry those vapors up,
For every cloud engenders not a storm.

RICHARD
The Queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford, fled to her.
If she have time to breathe, be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.

KING EDWARD
We are advertised by our loving friends
That they do hold their course toward Tewkesbury.
We having now the best at Barnet Field
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way,
And, as we march, our strength will be augmented
In every county as we go along.
Strike up the drum, cry "Courage!" and away.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Flourish. March. Enter Queen Margaret,
young Prince Edward, Somerset, Oxford,
and Soldiers, all wearing the red rose.]


QUEEN MARGARET
Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
And half our sailors swallowed in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still. Is 't meet that he
Should leave the helm and, like a fearful lad,
With tearful eyes add water to the sea
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
Whiles in his moan the ship splits on the rock,
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Ah, what a shame, ah, what a fault were this!
Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?
And Montague our topmast; what of him?
Our slaughtered friends the tackles; what of these?
Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
And Somerset another goodly mast?
The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
And, though unskillful, why not Ned and I
For once allowed the skillful pilot's charge?
We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wrack.
As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
And what is Edward but a ruthless sea?
What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
And Richard but a ragged fatal rock--
All these the enemies to our poor bark?
Say you can swim: alas, 'tis but awhile;
Tread on the sand: why, there you quickly sink;
Bestride the rock: the tide will wash you off
Or else you famish; that's a threefold death.
This speak I, lords, to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from us,
That there's no hoped-for mercy with the brothers
More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.
Why, courage then! What cannot be avoided
'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.

PRINCE EDWARD
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
Should, if a coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his breast with magnanimity
And make him, naked, foil a man-at-arms.
I speak not this as doubting any here,
For did I but suspect a fearful man,
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Lest in our need he might infect another
And make him of like spirit to himself.
If any such be here, as God forbid,
Let him depart before we need his help.

OXFORD
Women and children of so high a courage,
And warriors faint? Why, 'twere perpetual shame!
O, brave young prince, thy famous grandfather
Doth live again in thee. Long mayst thou live
To bear his image and renew his glories!

SOMERSET
And he that will not fight for such a hope,
Go home to bed and, like the owl by day,
If he arise, be mocked and wondered at.

QUEEN MARGARET
Thanks, gentle Somerset.--Sweet Oxford, thanks.

PRINCE EDWARD
And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand,
Ready to fight. Therefore be resolute.	[He exits.]

OXFORD
I thought no less. It is his policy
To haste thus fast to find us unprovided.

SOMERSET
But he's deceived. We are in readiness.

QUEEN MARGARET
This cheers my heart to see your forwardness.

OXFORD
Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.

[Flourish, and march. Enter King Edward, Richard,
Clarence, and Soldiers, all wearing the white rose.]


KING EDWARD, [to his army]
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood
Which by the heavens' assistance and your strength
Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
For, well I wot, you blaze to burn them out.
Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!

QUEEN MARGARET, [to her army]
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
My tears gainsay, for every word I speak
You see I drink the water of my eye.
Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
Is prisoner to the foe, his state usurped,
His realm a slaughterhouse, his subjects slain,
His statutes cancelled and his treasure spent,
And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
You fight in justice. Then, in God's name, lords,
Be valiant, and give signal to the fight!
[Alarum, retreat, excursions. They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Flourish. Enter King Edward, Richard, and
Clarence, all wearing the white rose, with Soldiers
guarding Queen Margaret, Oxford, and Somerset,
all wearing the red rose, prisoners.]


KING EDWARD
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight.
For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
Go bear them hence. I will not hear them speak.

OXFORD
For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.

SOMERSET
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.

QUEEN MARGARET
So part we sadly in this troublous world
To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.
[Oxford and Somerset exit, under guard.]

KING EDWARD
Is proclamation made that who finds Edward
Shall have a high reward, and he his life?

RICHARD
It is, and lo where youthful Edward comes.

[Enter Prince Edward, wearing the red rose,
under guard.]


KING EDWARD
Bring forth the gallant; let us hear him speak.
What, can so young a thorn begin to prick?--
Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
And all the trouble thou hast turned me to?

PRINCE EDWARD
Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York.
Suppose that I am now my father's mouth:
Resign thy chair, and where I stand, kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee
Which, traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.

QUEEN MARGARET
Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!

RICHARD
That you might still have worn the petticoat
And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.

PRINCE EDWARD
Let Aesop fable in a winter's night;
His currish riddles sorts not with this place.

RICHARD
By heaven, brat, I'll plague you for that word.

QUEEN MARGARET
Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.

RICHARD
For God's sake, take away this captive scold.

PRINCE EDWARD
Nay, take away this scolding crookback, rather.

KING EDWARD
Peace, willful boy, or I will charm your tongue.

CLARENCE, [to Prince Edward]
Untutored lad, thou art too malapert.

PRINCE EDWARD
I know my duty. You are all undutiful.
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou misshapen Dick, I tell you all
I am your better, traitors as you are,
And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.

KING EDWARD
Take that, the likeness of this railer here!	[Stabs him.]

RICHARD
Sprawl'st thou? Take that to end thy agony!
[Richard stabs him.]

CLARENCE
And there's for twitting me with perjury.
[Clarence stabs him.]

QUEEN MARGARET  O, kill me too!

RICHARD  Marry, and shall.	[Offers to kill her.]

KING EDWARD
Hold, Richard, hold, for we have done too much.

RICHARD
Why should she live to fill the world with words?
[Queen Margaret faints.]

KING EDWARD
What, doth she swoon? Use means for her recovery.
[They attempt to revive her.]

RICHARD, [taking Clarence aside]
Clarence, excuse me to the King my brother.
I'll hence to London on a serious matter.
Ere you come there, be sure to hear some news.

CLARENCE  What? What?

RICHARD  The Tower, the Tower!	[He exits.]

QUEEN MARGARET, [rising from her swoon]
O Ned, sweet Ned, speak to thy mother, boy.
Canst thou not speak? O traitors, murderers!
They that stabbed Caesar shed no blood at all,
Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
If this foul deed were by to equal it.
He was a man; this, in respect, a child,
And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
What's worse than murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst an if I speak,
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and villains, bloody cannibals,
How sweet a plant have you untimely cropped!
You have no children, butchers. If you had,
The thought of them would have stirred up remorse.
But if you ever chance to have a child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off
As, deathsmen, you have rid this sweet young prince.

KING EDWARD
Away with her. Go bear her hence perforce.

QUEEN MARGARET
Nay, never bear me hence! Dispatch me here.
Here sheathe thy sword; I'll pardon thee my death.
What, wilt thou not?--Then, Clarence, do it thou.

CLARENCE
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.

QUEEN MARGARET
Good Clarence, do! Sweet Clarence, do thou do it.

CLARENCE
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?

QUEEN MARGARET
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself.
'Twas sin before, but now 'tis charity.
What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher,
Richard,
Hard-favored Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here. Murder is thy alms-deed;
Petitioners for blood thou ne'er putt'st back.

KING EDWARD
Away, I say! [(To Soldiers.)] I charge you bear her
hence.

QUEEN MARGARET
So come to you and yours as to this prince!
[Queen Margaret exits under guard.
Soldiers carry off Prince Edward's body.]

KING EDWARD  Where's Richard gone?

CLARENCE
To London all in post, and, as I guess,
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.

KING EDWARD
He's sudden if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence. Discharge the common sort
With pay and thanks, and let's away to London
And see our gentle queen how well she fares.
By this I hope she hath a son for me.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter King Henry the Sixth, wearing the red rose,
and Richard of Gloucester, wearing the white rose,
with the Lieutenant above on the Tower walls.]


RICHARD
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?

KING HENRY
Ay, my good lord--"my lord," I should say rather.
'Tis sin to flatter; "good" was little better:
"Good Gloucester" and "good devil" were alike,
And both preposterous: therefore, not "good lord."

RICHARD, [to Lieutenant]
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves; we must confer.
[Lieutenant exits.]

KING HENRY
So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;
So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece
And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?

RICHARD
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.

KING HENRY
The bird that hath been limed in a bush,
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
Have now the fatal object in my eye
Where my poor young was limed, was caught, and
killed.

RICHARD
Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete
That taught his son the office of a fowl!
And yet, for all his wings, the fool was drowned.

KING HENRY
I Daedalus, my poor boy Icarus,
Thy father Minos, that denied our course;
The sun that seared the wings of my sweet boy
Thy brother Edward, and thyself the sea
Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
My breast can better brook thy dagger's point
Than can my ears that tragic history.
But wherefore dost thou come? Is 't for my life?

RICHARD
Think'st thou I am an executioner?

KING HENRY
A persecutor I am sure thou art.
If murdering innocents be executing,
Why, then, thou art an executioner.

RICHARD
Thy son I killed for his presumption.

KING HENRY
Hadst thou been killed when first thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
And thus I prophesy: that many a thousand
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old man's sigh, and many a widow's
And many an orphan's water-standing eye,
Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
Orphans for their parents' timeless death,
Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
The owl shrieked at thy birth, an evil sign;
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time;
Dogs howled, and hideous tempest shook down trees;
The raven rooked her on the chimney's top;
And chatt'ring pies in dismal discords sung;
Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
And yet brought forth less than a mother's hope:
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born
To signify thou cam'st to bite the world.
And if the rest be true which I have heard,
Thou cam'st--

RICHARD
I'll hear no more. Die, prophet, in thy speech;

[Stabs him.]
For this amongst the rest was I ordained.

KING HENRY
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
O God, forgive my sins, and pardon thee.	[Dies.]

RICHARD
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor king's death.
O, may such purple tears be always shed
From those that wish the downfall of our house.
If any spark of life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell, and say I sent thee thither--
[Stabs him again.]
I that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of,
For I have often heard my mother say
I came into the world with my legs forward.
Had I not reason, think you, to make haste
And seek their ruin that usurped our right?
The midwife wondered, and the women cried
"O Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!"
And so I was, which plainly signified
That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog.
Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.
I have no brother, I am like no brother;
And this word "love," which graybeards call divine,
Be resident in men like one another
And not in me. I am myself alone.
Clarence, beware; thou keep'st me from the light,
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
For I will buzz abroad such prophecies
That Edward shall be fearful of his life;
And then to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.
King Henry and the Prince his son are gone.
Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting myself but bad till I be best.
I'll throw thy body in another room,
And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.
[He exits, carrying out the body.]

Scene 7
=======
[Flourish. Enter King Edward, Queen Elizabeth,
Clarence, Richard of Gloucester, Hastings, Nurse,
carrying infant Prince Edward, and Attendants.]


KING EDWARD
Once more we sit in England's royal throne,
Repurchased with the blood of enemies.
What valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn,
Have we mowed down in tops of all their pride!
Three dukes of Somerset, threefold renowned
For hardy and undoubted champions;
Two Cliffords, as the father and the son;
And two Northumberlands; two braver men
Ne'er spurred their coursers at the trumpet's sound.
With them the two brave bears, Warwick and
Montague,
That in their chains fettered the kingly lion
And made the forest tremble when they roared.
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
And made our footstool of security.--
Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.--
Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself
Have in our armors watched the winter's night,
Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat,
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace,
And of our labors thou shalt reap the gain.

RICHARD, [aside]
I'll blast his harvest, if your head were laid;
For yet I am not looked on in the world.
This shoulder was ordained so thick to heave,
And heave it shall some weight or break my back.
Work thou the way and that shalt execute.

KING EDWARD
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen,
And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.

CLARENCE
The duty that I owe unto your Majesty
I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.
[He kisses the infant.]

KING EDWARD
Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.

RICHARD
And that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.
[He kisses the infant.]
[Aside.] To say the truth, so Judas kissed his master
And cried "All hail!" whenas he meant all harm.

KING EDWARD
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.

CLARENCE
What will your Grace have done with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, to the King of France
Hath pawned the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

KING EDWARD
Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
And now what rests but that we spend the time
With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
Sound drums and trumpets! Farewell, sour annoy,
For here I hope begins our lasting joy.
[Flourish. They all exit.]


Much Ado About Nothing
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/much-ado-about-nothing/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
LEONATO, Governor of Messina
HERO, his daughter
BEATRICE, his niece
LEONATO'S BROTHER
Waiting gentlewomen to Hero:
  MARGARET
  URSULA
DON PEDRO, Prince of Aragon
COUNT CLAUDIO, a young lord from Florence
SIGNIOR BENEDICK, a gentleman from Padua
BALTHASAR
SIGNIOR ANTONIO
DON JOHN, Don Pedro's brother
Don John's followers:
  BORACHIO
  CONRADE
DOGBERRY, Master Constable in Messina
VERGES, Dogberry's partner
GEORGE SEACOAL, leader of the Watch
FIRST WATCHMAN
SECOND WATCHMAN
SEXTON
FRIAR FRANCIS
MESSENGER to Leonato
MESSENGER to Don Pedro
BOY
Musicians, Lords, Attendants, Son to Leonato's brother


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Leonato, Governor of Messina, Hero his daughter,
and Beatrice his niece, with a Messenger.]


LEONATO, [with a letter]  I learn in this letter that Don
Pedro of Aragon comes this night to Messina.

MESSENGER  He is very near by this. He was not three
leagues off when I left him.

LEONATO  How many gentlemen have you lost in this
action?

MESSENGER  But few of any sort, and none of name.

LEONATO  A victory is twice itself when the achiever
brings home full numbers. I find here that Don
Pedro hath bestowed much honor on a young
Florentine called Claudio.

MESSENGER  Much deserved on his part, and equally
remembered by Don Pedro. He hath borne himself
beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure
of a lamb the feats of a lion. He hath indeed better
bettered expectation than you must expect of me to
tell you how.

LEONATO  He hath an uncle here in Messina will be
very much glad of it.

MESSENGER  I have already delivered him letters, and
there appears much joy in him, even so much that
joy could not show itself modest enough without a
badge of bitterness.

LEONATO  Did he break out into tears?

MESSENGER  In great measure.

LEONATO  A kind overflow of kindness. There are no
faces truer than those that are so washed. How
much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at
weeping!

BEATRICE  I pray you, is Signior Mountanto returned
from the wars or no?

MESSENGER  I know none of that name, lady. There
was none such in the army of any sort.

LEONATO  What is he that you ask for, niece?

HERO  My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.

MESSENGER  O, he's returned, and as pleasant as ever
he was.

BEATRICE  He set up his bills here in Messina and
challenged Cupid at the flight, and my uncle's Fool,
reading the challenge, subscribed for Cupid and
challenged him at the bird-bolt. I pray you, how
many hath he killed and eaten in these wars? But
how many hath he killed? For indeed I promised to
eat all of his killing.

LEONATO  Faith, niece, you tax Signior Benedick too
much, but he'll be meet with you, I doubt it not.

MESSENGER  He hath done good service, lady, in these
wars.

BEATRICE  You had musty victual, and he hath holp to
eat it. He is a very valiant trencherman; he hath an
excellent stomach.

MESSENGER  And a good soldier too, lady.

BEATRICE  And a good soldier to a lady, but what is he
to a lord?

MESSENGER  A lord to a lord, a man to a man, stuffed
with all honorable virtues.

BEATRICE  It is so indeed. He is no less than a stuffed
man, but for the stuffing--well, we are all mortal.

LEONATO  You must not, sir, mistake my niece. There is
a kind of merry war betwixt Signior Benedick and
her. They never meet but there's a skirmish of wit
between them.

BEATRICE  Alas, he gets nothing by that. In our last
conflict, four of his five wits went halting off, and
now is the whole man governed with one, so that if
he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let him
bear it for a difference between himself and his
horse, for it is all the wealth that he hath left to
be known a reasonable creature. Who is his companion
now? He hath every month a new sworn
brother.

MESSENGER  Is 't possible?

BEATRICE  Very easily possible. He wears his faith but
as the fashion of his hat; it ever changes with the
next block.

MESSENGER  I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your
books.

BEATRICE  No. An he were, I would burn my study. But
I pray you, who is his companion? Is there no
young squarer now that will make a voyage with
him to the devil?

MESSENGER  He is most in the company of the right
noble Claudio.

BEATRICE  O Lord, he will hang upon him like a
disease! He is sooner caught than the pestilence,
and the taker runs presently mad. God help the
noble Claudio! If he have caught the Benedick, it
will cost him a thousand pound ere he be cured.

MESSENGER  I will hold friends with you, lady.

BEATRICE  Do, good friend.

LEONATO  You will never run mad, niece.

BEATRICE  No, not till a hot January.

MESSENGER  Don Pedro is approached.

[Enter Don Pedro, Prince of Aragon, with Claudio,
Benedick, Balthasar, and John the Bastard.]


PRINCE  Good Signior Leonato, are you come to meet
your trouble? The fashion of the world is to avoid
cost, and you encounter it.

LEONATO  Never came trouble to my house in the
likeness of your Grace, for trouble being gone,
comfort should remain, but when you depart from
me, sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.

PRINCE  You embrace your charge too willingly. [Turning
to Hero.] I think this is your daughter.

LEONATO  Her mother hath many times told me so.

BENEDICK  Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?

LEONATO  Signior Benedick, no, for then were you a
child.

PRINCE  You have it full, Benedick. We may guess by
this what you are, being a man. Truly the lady
fathers herself.--Be happy, lady, for you are like
an honorable father.
[Leonato and the Prince move aside.]

BENEDICK  If Signior Leonato be her father, she would
not have his head on her shoulders for all Messina,
as like him as she is.

BEATRICE  I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior
Benedick, nobody marks you.

BENEDICK  What, my dear Lady Disdain! Are you yet
living?

BEATRICE  Is it possible disdain should die while she
hath such meet food to feed it as Signior Benedick?
Courtesy itself must convert to disdain if you come
in her presence.

BENEDICK  Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain
I am loved of all ladies, only you excepted; and
I would I could find in my heart that I had not a
hard heart, for truly I love none.

BEATRICE  A dear happiness to women. They would
else have been troubled with a pernicious suitor. I
thank God and my cold blood I am of your humor
for that. I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow
than a man swear he loves me.

BENEDICK  God keep your Ladyship still in that mind,
so some gentleman or other shall 'scape a predestinate
scratched face.

BEATRICE  Scratching could not make it worse an
'twere such a face as yours were.

BENEDICK  Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.

BEATRICE  A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of
yours.

BENEDICK  I would my horse had the speed of your
tongue and so good a continuer, but keep your
way, i' God's name, I have done.

BEATRICE  You always end with a jade's trick. I know
you of old.
[Leonato and the Prince come forward.]

PRINCE  That is the sum of all, Leonato.--Signior
Claudio and Signior Benedick, my dear friend
Leonato hath invited you all. I tell him we shall stay
here at the least a month, and he heartily prays
some occasion may detain us longer. I dare swear
he is no hypocrite, but prays from his heart.

LEONATO  If you swear, my lord, you shall not be
forsworn. [To Don John.] Let me bid you welcome,
my lord, being reconciled to the Prince your brother,
I owe you all duty.

DON JOHN  I thank you. I am not of many words, but I
thank you.

LEONATO  Please it your Grace lead on?

PRINCE  Your hand, Leonato. We will go together.
[All exit except Benedick and Claudio.]

CLAUDIO  Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of
Signior Leonato?

BENEDICK  I noted her not, but I looked on her.

CLAUDIO  Is she not a modest young lady?

BENEDICK  Do you question me as an honest man
should do, for my simple true judgment? Or would
you have me speak after my custom, as being a
professed tyrant to their sex?

CLAUDIO  No, I pray thee, speak in sober judgment.

BENEDICK  Why, i' faith, methinks she's too low for a
high praise, too brown for a fair praise, and too
little for a great praise. Only this commendation I
can afford her, that were she other than she is, she
were unhandsome, and being no other but as she is,
I do not like her.

CLAUDIO  Thou thinkest I am in sport. I pray thee tell
me truly how thou lik'st her.

BENEDICK  Would you buy her that you enquire after
her?

CLAUDIO  Can the world buy such a jewel?

BENEDICK  Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you
this with a sad brow? Or do you play the flouting
jack, to tell us Cupid is a good hare-finder and
Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in what key shall a
man take you to go in the song?

CLAUDIO  In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever
I looked on.

BENEDICK  I can see yet without spectacles, and I see
no such matter. There's her cousin, an she were not
possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in
beauty as the first of May doth the last of December.
But I hope you have no intent to turn husband, have
you?

CLAUDIO  I would scarce trust myself, though I had
sworn the contrary, if Hero would be my wife.

BENEDICK  Is 't come to this? In faith, hath not the
world one man but he will wear his cap with
suspicion? Shall I never see a bachelor of threescore
again? Go to, i' faith, an thou wilt needs thrust
thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it, and sigh
away Sundays. Look, Don Pedro is returned to seek
you.

[Enter Don Pedro, Prince of Aragon.]


PRINCE  What secret hath held you here that you followed
not to Leonato's?

BENEDICK  I would your Grace would constrain me to
tell.

PRINCE  I charge thee on thy allegiance.

BENEDICK  You hear, Count Claudio, I can be secret as
a dumb man, I would have you think so, but on my
allegiance--mark you this, on my allegiance--he
is in love. With who? Now, that is your Grace's part.
Mark how short his answer is: with Hero, Leonato's
short daughter.

CLAUDIO  If this were so, so were it uttered.

BENEDICK  Like the old tale, my lord: "It is not so, nor
'twas not so, but, indeed, God forbid it should be
so."

CLAUDIO  If my passion change not shortly, God forbid
it should be otherwise.

PRINCE  Amen, if you love her, for the lady is very well
worthy.

CLAUDIO  You speak this to fetch me in, my lord.

PRINCE  By my troth, I speak my thought.

CLAUDIO  And in faith, my lord, I spoke mine.

BENEDICK  And by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I
spoke mine.

CLAUDIO  That I love her, I feel.

PRINCE  That she is worthy, I know.

BENEDICK  That I neither feel how she should be loved
nor know how she should be worthy is the opinion
that fire cannot melt out of me. I will die in it at the
stake.

PRINCE  Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the
despite of beauty.

CLAUDIO  And never could maintain his part but in the
force of his will.

BENEDICK  That a woman conceived me, I thank her;
that she brought me up, I likewise give her most
humble thanks. But that I will have a recheat
winded in my forehead or hang my bugle in an
invisible baldrick, all women shall pardon me.
Because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust
any, I will do myself the right to trust none. And the
fine is, for the which I may go the finer, I will live a
bachelor.

PRINCE  I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.

BENEDICK  With anger, with sickness, or with hunger,
my lord, not with love. Prove that ever I lose more
blood with love than I will get again with drinking,
pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen and
hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the
sign of blind Cupid.

PRINCE  Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou
wilt prove a notable argument.

BENEDICK  If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and
shoot at me, and he that hits me, let him be clapped
on the shoulder and called Adam.

PRINCE  Well, as time shall try.
In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.

BENEDICK  The savage bull may, but if ever the sensible
Benedick bear it, pluck off the bull's horns and set
them in my forehead, and let me be vilely painted,
and in such great letters as they write "Here is good
horse to hire" let them signify under my sign "Here
you may see Benedick the married man."

CLAUDIO  If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be
horn-mad.

PRINCE  Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in
Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.

BENEDICK  I look for an earthquake too, then.

PRINCE  Well, you will temporize with the hours. In the
meantime, good Signior Benedick, repair to Leonato's.
Commend me to him, and tell him I will not
fail him at supper, for indeed he hath made great
preparation.

BENEDICK  I have almost matter enough in me for such
an embassage, and so I commit you--

CLAUDIO  To the tuition of God. From my house, if I had
it--

PRINCE  The sixth of July. Your loving friend,
Benedick.

BENEDICK  Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your
discourse is sometimes guarded with fragments,
and the guards are but slightly basted on neither.
Ere you flout old ends any further, examine your
conscience. And so I leave you.	[He exits.]

CLAUDIO
My liege, your Highness now may do me good.

PRINCE
My love is thine to teach. Teach it but how,
And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn
Any hard lesson that may do thee good.

CLAUDIO
Hath Leonato any son, my lord?

PRINCE
No child but Hero; she's his only heir.
Dost thou affect her, Claudio?

CLAUDIO  O, my lord,
When you went onward on this ended action,
I looked upon her with a soldier's eye,
That liked, but had a rougher task in hand
Than to drive liking to the name of love.
But now I am returned and that war thoughts
Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
Saying I liked her ere I went to wars.

PRINCE
Thou wilt be like a lover presently
And tire the hearer with a book of words.
If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
And I will break with her and with her father,
And thou shalt have her. Was 't not to this end
That thou began'st to twist so fine a story?

CLAUDIO
How sweetly you do minister to love,
That know love's grief by his complexion!
But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
I would have salved it with a longer treatise.

PRINCE
What need the bridge much broader than the flood?
The fairest grant is the necessity.
Look what will serve is fit. 'Tis once, thou lovest,
And I will fit thee with the remedy.
I know we shall have reveling tonight.
I will assume thy part in some disguise
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart
And take her hearing prisoner with the force
And strong encounter of my amorous tale.
Then after to her father will I break,
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.
In practice let us put it presently.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Leonato, meeting an old man, brother to
Leonato.]


LEONATO  How now, brother, where is my cousin, your
son? Hath he provided this music?

LEONATO'S BROTHER  He is very busy about it. But,
brother, I can tell you strange news that you yet
dreamt not of.

LEONATO  Are they good?

LEONATO'S BROTHER  As the events stamps them, but
they have a good cover; they show well outward.
The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached
alley in mine orchard, were thus much
overheard by a man of mine: the Prince discovered
to Claudio that he loved my niece your daughter and
meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, and if
he found her accordant, he meant to take the
present time by the top and instantly break with you
of it.

LEONATO  Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?

LEONATO'S BROTHER  A good sharp fellow. I will send
for him, and question him yourself.

LEONATO  No, no, we will hold it as a dream till it
appear itself. But I will acquaint my daughter
withal, that she may be the better prepared for an
answer, if peradventure this be true. Go you and tell
her of it.

[Enter Antonio's son, with a Musician and Attendants.]

Cousins, you know what you have to do.--O, I cry
you mercy, friend. Go you with me and I will use
your skill.--Good cousin, have a care this busy
time.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Sir John the Bastard, and Conrade, his
companion.]


CONRADE  What the goodyear, my lord, why are you
thus out of measure sad?

DON JOHN  There is no measure in the occasion that
breeds. Therefore the sadness is without limit.

CONRADE  You should hear reason.

DON JOHN  And when I have heard it, what blessing
brings it?

CONRADE  If not a present remedy, at least a patient
sufferance.

DON JOHN  I wonder that thou, being, as thou sayst thou
art, born under Saturn, goest about to apply a moral
medicine to a mortifying mischief. I cannot hide
what I am. I must be sad when I have cause, and
smile at no man's jests; eat when I have stomach,
and wait for no man's leisure; sleep when I am
drowsy, and tend on no man's business; laugh when
I am merry, and claw no man in his humor.

CONRADE  Yea, but you must not make the full show of
this till you may do it without controlment. You
have of late stood out against your brother, and he
hath ta'en you newly into his grace, where it is
impossible you should take true root but by the fair
weather that you make yourself. It is needful that
you frame the season for your own harvest.

DON JOHN  I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a
rose in his grace, and it better fits my blood to be
disdained of all than to fashion a carriage to rob
love from any. In this, though I cannot be said to be
a flattering honest man, it must not be denied but I
am a plain-dealing villain. I am trusted with a
muzzle and enfranchised with a clog; therefore I
have decreed not to sing in my cage. If I had my
mouth, I would bite; if I had my liberty, I would do
my liking. In the meantime, let me be that I am, and
seek not to alter me.

CONRADE  Can you make no use of your discontent?

DON JOHN  I make all use of it, for I use it only. Who
comes here?

[Enter Borachio.]

What news, Borachio?

BORACHIO  I came yonder from a great supper. The
Prince your brother is royally entertained by
Leonato, and I can give you intelligence of an
intended marriage.

DON JOHN  Will it serve for any model to build mischief
on? What is he for a fool that betroths himself to
unquietness?

BORACHIO  Marry, it is your brother's right hand.

DON JOHN  Who, the most exquisite Claudio?

BORACHIO  Even he.

DON JOHN  A proper squire. And who, and who? Which
way looks he?

BORACHIO  Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of
Leonato.

DON JOHN  A very forward March chick! How came you
to this?

BORACHIO  Being entertained for a perfumer, as I was
smoking a musty room, comes me the Prince and
Claudio, hand in hand, in sad conference. I
whipped me behind the arras, and there heard it
agreed upon that the Prince should woo Hero for
himself, and having obtained her, give her to Count
Claudio.

DON JOHN  Come, come, let us thither. This may prove
food to my displeasure. That young start-up hath
all the glory of my overthrow. If I can cross him any
way, I bless myself every way. You are both sure, and
will assist me?

CONRADE  To the death, my lord.

DON JOHN  Let us to the great supper. Their cheer is the
greater that I am subdued. Would the cook were o'
my mind! Shall we go prove what's to be done?

BORACHIO  We'll wait upon your Lordship.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Leonato, his brother, Hero his daughter, and
Beatrice his niece, with Ursula and Margaret.]


LEONATO  Was not Count John here at supper?

LEONATO'S BROTHER  I saw him not.

BEATRICE  How tartly that gentleman looks! I never
can see him but I am heartburned an hour after.

HERO  He is of a very melancholy disposition.

BEATRICE  He were an excellent man that were made
just in the midway between him and Benedick. The
one is too like an image and says nothing, and the
other too like my lady's eldest son, evermore
tattling.

LEONATO  Then half Signior Benedick's tongue in
Count John's mouth, and half Count John's melancholy
in Signior Benedick's face--

BEATRICE  With a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and
money enough in his purse, such a man would win
any woman in the world if he could get her
goodwill.

LEONATO  By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a
husband if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.

LEONATO'S BROTHER  In faith, she's too curst.

BEATRICE  Too curst is more than curst. I shall lessen
God's sending that way, for it is said "God sends a
curst cow short horns," but to a cow too curst, he
sends none.

LEONATO  So, by being too curst, God will send you no
horns.

BEATRICE  Just, if He send me no husband, for the
which blessing I am at Him upon my knees every
morning and evening. Lord, I could not endure a
husband with a beard on his face. I had rather lie in
the woolen!

LEONATO  You may light on a husband that hath no
beard.

BEATRICE  What should I do with him? Dress him in my
apparel and make him my waiting gentlewoman?
He that hath a beard is more than a youth, and he
that hath no beard is less than a man; and he that is
more than a youth is not for me, and he that is less
than a man, I am not for him. Therefore I will even
take sixpence in earnest of the bearherd, and lead
his apes into hell.

LEONATO  Well then, go you into hell?

BEATRICE  No, but to the gate, and there will the devil
meet me like an old cuckold with horns on his
head, and say "Get you to heaven, Beatrice, get you
to heaven; here's no place for you maids." So deliver
I up my apes and away to Saint Peter; for the
heavens, he shows me where the bachelors sit, and
there live we as merry as the day is long.

LEONATO'S BROTHER, [to Hero]  Well, niece, I trust you
will be ruled by your father.

BEATRICE  Yes, faith, it is my cousin's duty to make
curtsy and say "Father, as it please you." But yet for
all that, cousin, let him be a handsome fellow, or
else make another curtsy and say "Father, as it
please me."

LEONATO  Well, niece, I hope to see you one day fitted
with a husband.

BEATRICE  Not till God make men of some other metal
than earth. Would it not grieve a woman to be
overmastered with a piece of valiant dust? To make
an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl?
No, uncle, I'll none. Adam's sons are my brethren,
and truly I hold it a sin to match in my kindred.

LEONATO, [to Hero]  Daughter, remember what I told
you. If the Prince do solicit you in that kind, you
know your answer.

BEATRICE  The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you
be not wooed in good time. If the Prince be too
important, tell him there is measure in everything,
and so dance out the answer. For hear me, Hero,
wooing, wedding, and repenting is as a Scotch jig, a
measure, and a cinquepace. The first suit is hot and
hasty like a Scotch jig, and full as fantastical; the
wedding, mannerly modest as a measure, full of
state and ancientry; and then comes repentance,
and with his bad legs falls into the cinquepace faster
and faster till he sink into his grave.

LEONATO  Cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.

BEATRICE  I have a good eye, uncle; I can see a church
by daylight.

LEONATO  The revelers are entering, brother. Make
good room.	[Leonato and his brother step aside.]

[Enter, with a Drum, Prince Pedro, Claudio, and
Benedick, Signior Antonio, and Balthasar, all in
masks, with Borachio and Don John.]


PRINCE, [to Hero]  Lady, will you walk a bout with your
friend?	[They begin to dance.]

HERO  So you walk softly, and look sweetly, and say
nothing, I am yours for the walk, and especially
when I walk away.

PRINCE  With me in your company?

HERO  I may say so when I please.

PRINCE  And when please you to say so?

HERO  When I like your favor, for God defend the lute
should be like the case.

PRINCE  My visor is Philemon's roof; within the house
is Jove.

HERO  Why, then, your visor should be thatched.

PRINCE  Speak low if you speak love.
[They move aside;
Benedick and Margaret move forward.]

BENEDICK, [to Margaret]  Well, I would you did like me.

MARGARET  So would not I for your own sake, for I have
many ill qualities.

BENEDICK  Which is one?

MARGARET  I say my prayers aloud.

BENEDICK  I love you the better; the hearers may cry
"Amen."

MARGARET  God match me with a good dancer.
[They separate; Benedick moves aside;
Balthasar moves forward.]

BALTHASAR  Amen.

MARGARET  And God keep him out of my sight when the
dance is done. Answer, clerk.

BALTHASAR  No more words. The clerk is answered.
[They move aside;
Ursula and Antonio move forward.]

URSULA  I know you well enough. You are Signior
Antonio.

ANTONIO  At a word, I am not.

URSULA  I know you by the waggling of your head.

ANTONIO  To tell you true, I counterfeit him.

URSULA  You could never do him so ill-well unless you
were the very man. Here's his dry hand up and
down. You are he, you are he.

ANTONIO  At a word, I am not.

URSULA  Come, come, do you think I do not know you
by your excellent wit? Can virtue hide itself? Go to,
mum, you are he. Graces will appear, and there's an
end.
[They move aside;
Benedick and Beatrice move forward.]

BEATRICE  Will you not tell me who told you so?

BENEDICK  No, you shall pardon me.

BEATRICE  Nor will you not tell me who you are?

BENEDICK  Not now.

BEATRICE  That I was disdainful, and that I had my
good wit out of The Hundred Merry Tales! Well, this
was Signior Benedick that said so.

BENEDICK  What's he?

BEATRICE  I am sure you know him well enough.

BENEDICK  Not I, believe me.

BEATRICE  Did he never make you laugh?

BENEDICK  I pray you, what is he?

BEATRICE  Why, he is the Prince's jester, a very dull
fool; only his gift is in devising impossible slanders.
None but libertines delight in him, and the commendation
is not in his wit but in his villainy, for he
both pleases men and angers them, and then they
laugh at him and beat him. I am sure he is in the
fleet.I would he had boarded me.

BENEDICK  When I know the gentleman, I'll tell him
what you say.

BEATRICE  Do, do. He'll but break a comparison or two
on me, which peradventure not marked or not
laughed at strikes him into melancholy, and then
there's a partridge wing saved, for the fool will eat
no supper that night. [Music for the dance.] We must
follow the leaders.

BENEDICK  In every good thing.

BEATRICE  Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them
at the next turning.
[Dance. Then exit all except
Don John, Borachio, and Claudio.]

DON JOHN, [to Borachio]  Sure my brother is amorous
on Hero, and hath withdrawn her father to break
with him about it. The ladies follow her, and but one
visor remains.

BORACHIO  And that is Claudio. I know him by his
bearing.

DON JOHN, [to Claudio]  Are not you Signior Benedick?

CLAUDIO  You know me well. I am he.

DON JOHN  Signior, you are very near my brother in his
love. He is enamored on Hero. I pray you dissuade
him from her. She is no equal for his birth. You
may do the part of an honest man in it.

CLAUDIO  How know you he loves her?

DON JOHN  I heard him swear his affection.

BORACHIO  So did I too, and he swore he would marry
her tonight.

DON JOHN  Come, let us to the banquet.
[They exit. Claudio remains.]

CLAUDIO, [unmasking]
Thus answer I in name of Benedick,
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.
'Tis certain so. The Prince woos for himself.
Friendship is constant in all other things
Save in the office and affairs of love.
Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues.
Let every eye negotiate for itself
And trust no agent, for beauty is a witch
Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.
This is an accident of hourly proof,
Which I mistrusted not. Farewell therefore, Hero.

[Enter Benedick.]


BENEDICK  Count Claudio?

CLAUDIO  Yea, the same.

BENEDICK  Come, will you go with me?

CLAUDIO  Whither?

BENEDICK  Even to the next willow, about your own
business, county. What fashion will you wear the
garland of? About your neck like an usurer's chain?
Or under your arm like a lieutenant's scarf? You
must wear it one way, for the Prince hath got your
Hero.

CLAUDIO  I wish him joy of her.

BENEDICK  Why, that's spoken like an honest drover; so
they sell bullocks. But did you think the Prince
would have served you thus?

CLAUDIO  I pray you, leave me.

BENEDICK  Ho, now you strike like the blind man.
'Twas the boy that stole your meat, and you'll beat
the post.

CLAUDIO  If it will not be, I'll leave you.	[He exits.]

BENEDICK  Alas, poor hurt fowl, now will he creep into
sedges. But that my Lady Beatrice should know
me, and not know me! The Prince's fool! Ha, it may
be I go under that title because I am merry. Yea, but
so I am apt to do myself wrong. I am not so reputed!
It is the base, though bitter, disposition of Beatrice
that puts the world into her person and so gives me
out. Well, I'll be revenged as I may.

[Enter the Prince, Hero, and Leonato.]


PRINCE  Now, signior, where's the Count? Did you see
him?

BENEDICK  Troth, my lord, I have played the part of
Lady Fame. I found him here as melancholy as a
lodge in a warren. I told him, and I think I told him
true, that your Grace had got the goodwill of this
young lady, and I offered him my company to a
willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being
forsaken, or to bind him up a rod, as being worthy to
be whipped.

PRINCE  To be whipped? What's his fault?

BENEDICK  The flat transgression of a schoolboy who,
being overjoyed with finding a bird's nest, shows it
his companion, and he steals it.

PRINCE  Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? The
transgression is in the stealer.

BENEDICK  Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been
made, and the garland too, for the garland he
might have worn himself, and the rod he might
have bestowed on you, who, as I take it, have stolen
his bird's nest.

PRINCE  I will but teach them to sing and restore them
to the owner.

BENEDICK  If their singing answer your saying, by my
faith, you say honestly.

PRINCE  The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you. The
gentleman that danced with her told her she is
much wronged by you.

BENEDICK  O, she misused me past the endurance of a
block! An oak but with one green leaf on it would
have answered her. My very visor began to assume
life and scold with her. She told me, not thinking I
had been myself, that I was the Prince's jester, that I
was duller than a great thaw, huddling jest upon jest
with such impossible conveyance upon me that I
stood like a man at a mark with a whole army
shooting at me. She speaks poniards, and every
word stabs. If her breath were as terrible as her
terminations, there were no living near her; she
would infect to the North Star. I would not marry
her though she were endowed with all that Adam
had left him before he transgressed. She would have
made Hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft
his club to make the fire, too. Come, talk not of her.
You shall find her the infernal Ate in good apparel. I
would to God some scholar would conjure her, for
certainly, while she is here, a man may live as quiet
in hell as in a sanctuary, and people sin upon
purpose because they would go thither. So indeed
all disquiet, horror, and perturbation follows her.

[Enter Claudio and Beatrice.]


PRINCE  Look, here she comes.

BENEDICK  Will your Grace command me any service
to the world's end? I will go on the slightest errand
now to the Antipodes that you can devise to send
me on. I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the
furthest inch of Asia, bring you the length of Prester
John's foot, fetch you a hair off the great Cham's
beard, do you any embassage to the Pygmies, rather
than hold three words' conference with this harpy.
You have no employment for me?

PRINCE  None but to desire your good company.

BENEDICK  O God, sir, here's a dish I love not! I cannot
endure my Lady Tongue.	[He exits.]

PRINCE, [to Beatrice]  Come, lady, come, you have lost
the heart of Signior Benedick.

BEATRICE  Indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile, and I
gave him use for it, a double heart for his single
one. Marry, once before he won it of me with false
dice. Therefore your Grace may well say I have lost
it.

PRINCE  You have put him down, lady, you have put
him down.

BEATRICE  So I would not he should do me, my lord,
lest I should prove the mother of fools. I have
brought Count Claudio, whom you sent me to seek.

PRINCE  Why, how now, count, wherefore are you sad?

CLAUDIO  Not sad, my lord.

PRINCE  How then, sick?

CLAUDIO  Neither, my lord.

BEATRICE  The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry,
nor well, but civil count, civil as an orange, and
something of that jealous complexion.

PRINCE  I' faith, lady, I think your blazon to be true,
though I'll be sworn, if he be so, his conceit is
false.--Here, Claudio, I have wooed in thy name,
and fair Hero is won. I have broke with her father
and his goodwill obtained. Name the day of marriage,
and God give thee joy.

LEONATO  Count, take of me my daughter, and with her
my fortunes. His Grace hath made the match, and
all grace say "Amen" to it.

BEATRICE  Speak, count, 'tis your cue.

CLAUDIO  Silence is the perfectest herald of joy. I were
but little happy if I could say how much.--Lady, as
you are mine, I am yours. I give away myself for you
and dote upon the exchange.

BEATRICE  Speak, cousin, or, if you cannot, stop his
mouth with a kiss and let not him speak neither.

PRINCE  In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.

BEATRICE  Yea, my lord. I thank it, poor fool, it keeps on
the windy side of care. My cousin tells him in his ear
that he is in her heart.

CLAUDIO  And so she doth, cousin.

BEATRICE  Good Lord for alliance! Thus goes everyone
to the world but I, and I am sunburnt. I may sit in a
corner and cry "Heigh-ho for a husband!"

PRINCE  Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.

BEATRICE  I would rather have one of your father's
getting. Hath your Grace ne'er a brother like you?
Your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could
come by them.

PRINCE  Will you have me, lady?

BEATRICE  No, my lord, unless I might have another for
working days. Your Grace is too costly to wear
every day. But I beseech your Grace pardon me. I
was born to speak all mirth and no matter.

PRINCE  Your silence most offends me, and to be merry
best becomes you, for out o' question you were
born in a merry hour.

BEATRICE  No, sure, my lord, my mother cried, but then
there was a star danced, and under that was I
born.--Cousins, God give you joy!

LEONATO  Niece, will you look to those things I told
you of?

BEATRICE  I cry you mercy, uncle.--By your Grace's
pardon.	[Beatrice exits.]

PRINCE  By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.

LEONATO  There's little of the melancholy element in
her, my lord. She is never sad but when she sleeps,
and not ever sad then, for I have heard my daughter
say she hath often dreamt of unhappiness and
waked herself with laughing.

PRINCE  She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.

LEONATO  O, by no means. She mocks all her wooers
out of suit.

PRINCE  She were an excellent wife for Benedick.

LEONATO  O Lord, my lord, if they were but a week
married, they would talk themselves mad.

PRINCE  County Claudio, when mean you to go to
church?

CLAUDIO  Tomorrow, my lord. Time goes on crutches
till love have all his rites.

LEONATO  Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence
a just sevennight, and a time too brief, too, to have
all things answer my mind.

PRINCE, [to Claudio]  Come, you shake the head at so
long a breathing, but I warrant thee, Claudio, the
time shall not go dully by us. I will in the interim
undertake one of Hercules' labors, which is to bring
Signior Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a
mountain of affection, th' one with th' other. I
would fain have it a match, and I doubt not but to
fashion it, if you three will but minister such
assistance as I shall give you direction.

LEONATO  My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten
nights' watchings.

CLAUDIO  And I, my lord.

PRINCE  And you too, gentle Hero?

HERO  I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my
cousin to a good husband.

PRINCE  And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband
that I know. Thus far can I praise him: he is of
a noble strain, of approved valor, and confirmed
honesty. I will teach you how to humor your
cousin that she shall fall in love with Benedick.--
And I, with your two helps, will so practice on
Benedick that, in despite of his quick wit and his
queasy stomach, he shall fall in love with Beatrice.
If we can do this, Cupid is no longer an archer; his
glory shall be ours, for we are the only love gods. Go
in with me, and I will tell you my drift.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Don John and Borachio.]


DON JOHN  It is so. The Count Claudio shall marry the
daughter of Leonato.

BORACHIO  Yea, my lord, but I can cross it.

DON JOHN  Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be
med'cinable to me. I am sick in displeasure to him,
and whatsoever comes athwart his affection ranges
evenly with mine. How canst thou cross this
marriage?

BORACHIO  Not honestly, my lord, but so covertly that
no dishonesty shall appear in me.

DON JOHN  Show me briefly how.

BORACHIO  I think I told your Lordship a year since,
how much I am in the favor of Margaret, the
waiting gentlewoman to Hero.

DON JOHN  I remember.

BORACHIO  I can, at any unseasonable instant of the
night, appoint her to look out at her lady's chamber
window.

DON JOHN  What life is in that to be the death of this
marriage?

BORACHIO  The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go
you to the Prince your brother; spare not to tell
him that he hath wronged his honor in marrying
the renowned Claudio, whose estimation do you
mightily hold up, to a contaminated stale, such a
one as Hero.

DON JOHN  What proof shall I make of that?

BORACHIO  Proof enough to misuse the Prince, to vex
Claudio, to undo Hero, and kill Leonato. Look you
for any other issue?

DON JOHN  Only to despite them I will endeavor
anything.

BORACHIO  Go then, find me a meet hour to draw Don
Pedro and the Count Claudio alone. Tell them that
you know that Hero loves me; intend a kind of zeal
both to the Prince and Claudio, as in love of your
brother's honor, who hath made this match, and his
friend's reputation, who is thus like to be cozened
with the semblance of a maid, that you have discovered
thus. They will scarcely believe this without
trial. Offer them instances, which shall bear no less
likelihood than to see me at her chamber window,
hear me call Margaret "Hero," hear Margaret term
me "Claudio," and bring them to see this the very
night before the intended wedding, for in the meantime
I will so fashion the matter that Hero shall be
absent, and there shall appear such seeming truth
of Hero's disloyalty that jealousy shall be called
assurance and all the preparation overthrown.

DON JOHN  Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will
put it in practice. Be cunning in the working this,
and thy fee is a thousand ducats.

BORACHIO  Be you constant in the accusation, and my
cunning shall not shame me.

DON JOHN  I will presently go learn their day of
marriage.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Benedick alone.]


BENEDICK  Boy!

[Enter Boy.]


BOY  Signior?

BENEDICK  In my chamber window lies a book. Bring it
hither to me in the orchard.

BOY  I am here already, sir.

BENEDICK  I know that, but I would have thee hence
and here again.	[Boy exits.]
I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much
another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviors
to love, will, after he hath laughed at such
shallow follies in others, become the argument of
his own scorn by falling in love--and such a man is
Claudio. I have known when there was no music
with him but the drum and the fife, and now had he
rather hear the tabor and the pipe; I have known
when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see a
good armor, and now will he lie ten nights awake
carving the fashion of a new doublet. He was wont
to speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest
man and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography;
his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so
many strange dishes. May I be so converted and see
with these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not. I will not
be sworn but love may transform me to an oyster,
but I'll take my oath on it, till he have made an
oyster of me, he shall never make me such a fool.
One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet
I am well; another virtuous, yet I am well; but till all
graces be in one woman, one woman shall not
come in my grace. Rich she shall be, that's certain;
wise, or I'll none; virtuous, or I'll never cheapen
her; fair, or I'll never look on her; mild, or come not
near me; noble, or not I for an angel; of good
discourse, an excellent musician, and her hair shall
be of what color it please God. Ha! The Prince and
Monsieur Love! I will hide me in the arbor.
[He hides.]

[Enter Prince, Leonato, Claudio, and Balthasar
with music.]


PRINCE  Come, shall we hear this music?

CLAUDIO
Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,
As hushed on purpose to grace harmony!

PRINCE, [aside to Claudio]
See you where Benedick hath hid himself?

CLAUDIO, [aside to Prince]
O, very well my lord. The music ended,
We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.

PRINCE
Come, Balthasar, we'll hear that song again.

BALTHASAR
O, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice
To slander music any more than once.

PRINCE
It is the witness still of excellency
To put a strange face on his own perfection.
I pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more.

BALTHASAR
Because you talk of wooing, I will sing,
Since many a wooer doth commence his suit
To her he thinks not worthy, yet he woos,
Yet will he swear he loves.

PRINCE  Nay, pray thee, come,
Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
Do it in notes.

BALTHASAR  Note this before my notes:
There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting.

PRINCE
Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks!
Note notes, forsooth, and nothing.	[Music plays.]

BENEDICK, [aside]  Now, divine air! Now is his soul
ravished. Is it not strange that sheeps' guts should
hale souls out of men's bodies? Well, a horn for my
money, when all's done.

BALTHASAR [sings]
	Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more,
	   Men were deceivers ever,
	One foot in sea and one on shore,
	   To one thing constant never.
	Then sigh not so, but let them go,
	   And be you blithe and bonny,
	Converting all your sounds of woe
	   Into Hey, nonny nonny.

	Sing no more ditties, sing no mo,
	   Of dumps so dull and heavy.
	The fraud of men was ever so,
	   Since summer first was leavy.
	Then sigh not so, but let them go,
	   And be you blithe and bonny,
	Converting all your sounds of woe
	   Into Hey, nonny nonny.

PRINCE  By my troth, a good song.

BALTHASAR  And an ill singer, my lord.

PRINCE  Ha, no, no, faith, thou sing'st well enough for a
shift.

BENEDICK, [aside]  An he had been a dog that should
have howled thus, they would have hanged him. And
I pray God his bad voice bode no mischief. I had as
lief have heard the night raven, come what plague
could have come after it.

PRINCE  Yea, marry, dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray
thee get us some excellent music, for tomorrow
night we would have it at the Lady Hero's chamber
window.

BALTHASAR  The best I can, my lord.

PRINCE  Do so. Farewell.	[Balthasar exits.]
Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of
today, that your niece Beatrice was in love with
Signior Benedick?

CLAUDIO  O, ay. [Aside to Prince.] Stalk on, stalk on; the
fowl sits.--I did never think that lady would have
loved any man.

LEONATO  No, nor I neither, but most wonderful that
she should so dote on Signior Benedick, whom she
hath in all outward behaviors seemed ever to
abhor.

BENEDICK, [aside]  Is 't possible? Sits the wind in that
corner?

LEONATO  By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to
think of it, but that she loves him with an enraged
affection, it is past the infinite of thought.

PRINCE  Maybe she doth but counterfeit.

CLAUDIO  Faith, like enough.

LEONATO  O God! Counterfeit? There was never counterfeit
of passion came so near the life of passion as
she discovers it.

PRINCE  Why, what effects of passion shows she?

CLAUDIO, [aside to Leonato]  Bait the hook well; this fish
will bite.

LEONATO  What effects, my lord? She will sit you--you
heard my daughter tell you how.

CLAUDIO  She did indeed.

PRINCE  How, how I pray you? You amaze me. I would
have thought her spirit had been invincible against
all assaults of affection.

LEONATO  I would have sworn it had, my lord, especially
against Benedick.

BENEDICK, [aside]  I should think this a gull but that the
white-bearded fellow speaks it. Knavery cannot,
sure, hide himself in such reverence.

CLAUDIO, [aside to Prince]  He hath ta'en th' infection.
Hold it up.

PRINCE  Hath she made her affection known to
Benedick?

LEONATO  No, and swears she never will. That's her
torment.

CLAUDIO  'Tis true indeed, so your daughter says. "Shall
I," says she, "that have so oft encountered him with
scorn, write to him that I love him?"

LEONATO  This says she now when she is beginning to
write to him, for she'll be up twenty times a night,
and there will she sit in her smock till she have writ
a sheet of paper. My daughter tells us all.

CLAUDIO  Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember
a pretty jest your daughter told us of.

LEONATO  O, when she had writ it and was reading it
over, she found "Benedick" and "Beatrice" between
the sheet?

CLAUDIO  That.

LEONATO  O, she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence,
railed at herself that she should be so
immodest to write to one that she knew would flout
her. "I measure him," says she, "by my own spirit,
for I should flout him if he writ to me, yea, though I
love him, I should."

CLAUDIO  Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps,
sobs, beats her heart, tears her hair, prays, curses:
"O sweet Benedick, God give me patience!"

LEONATO  She doth indeed, my daughter says so, and
the ecstasy hath so much overborne her that my
daughter is sometimes afeared she will do a desperate
outrage to herself. It is very true.

PRINCE  It were good that Benedick knew of it by some
other, if she will not discover it.

CLAUDIO  To what end? He would make but a sport of it
and torment the poor lady worse.

PRINCE  An he should, it were an alms to hang him.
She's an excellent sweet lady, and, out of all suspicion,
she is virtuous.

CLAUDIO  And she is exceeding wise.

PRINCE  In everything but in loving Benedick.

LEONATO  O, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in
so tender a body, we have ten proofs to one that
blood hath the victory. I am sorry for her, as I have
just cause, being her uncle and her guardian.

PRINCE  I would she had bestowed this dotage on me. I
would have daffed all other respects and made her
half myself. I pray you tell Benedick of it, and hear
what he will say.

LEONATO  Were it good, think you?

CLAUDIO  Hero thinks surely she will die, for she says
she will die if he love her not, and she will die ere
she make her love known, and she will die if he woo
her rather than she will bate one breath of her
accustomed crossness.

PRINCE  She doth well. If she should make tender of
her love, 'tis very possible he'll scorn it, for the man,
as you know all, hath a contemptible spirit.

CLAUDIO  He is a very proper man.

PRINCE  He hath indeed a good outward happiness.

CLAUDIO  Before God, and in my mind, very wise.

PRINCE  He doth indeed show some sparks that are like
wit.

CLAUDIO  And I take him to be valiant.

PRINCE  As Hector, I assure you, and in the managing
of quarrels you may say he is wise, for either he
avoids them with great discretion or undertakes
them with a most Christianlike fear.

LEONATO  If he do fear God, he must necessarily keep
peace. If he break the peace, he ought to enter into
a quarrel with fear and trembling.

PRINCE  And so will he do, for the man doth fear God,
howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests
he will make. Well, I am sorry for your niece. Shall
we go seek Benedick and tell him of her love?

CLAUDIO  Never tell him, my lord, let her wear it out
with good counsel.

LEONATO  Nay, that's impossible; she may wear her
heart out first.

PRINCE  Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter.
Let it cool the while. I love Benedick well, and I
could wish he would modestly examine himself to
see how much he is unworthy so good a lady.

LEONATO  My lord, will you walk? Dinner is ready.
[Leonato, Prince, and Claudio begin to exit.]

CLAUDIO, [aside to Prince and Leonato]  If he do not
dote on her upon this, I will never trust my
expectation.

PRINCE, [aside to Leonato]  Let there be the same net
spread for her, and that must your daughter and her
gentlewomen carry. The sport will be when they
hold one an opinion of another's dotage, and no
such matter. That's the scene that I would see,
which will be merely a dumb show. Let us send her
to call him in to dinner.
[Prince, Leonato, and Claudio exit.]

BENEDICK, [coming forward]  This can be no trick. The
conference was sadly borne; they have the truth of
this from Hero; they seem to pity the lady. It seems
her affections have their full bent. Love me? Why, it
must be requited! I hear how I am censured. They
say I will bear myself proudly if I perceive the love
come from her. They say, too, that she will rather
die than give any sign of affection. I did never think
to marry. I must not seem proud. Happy are they
that hear their detractions and can put them to
mending. They say the lady is fair; 'tis a truth, I can
bear them witness. And virtuous; 'tis so, I cannot
reprove it. And wise, but for loving me; by my troth,
it is no addition to her wit, nor no great argument of
her folly, for I will be horribly in love with her! I
may chance have some odd quirks and remnants of
wit broken on me because I have railed so long
against marriage, but doth not the appetite alter? A
man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot
endure in his age. Shall quips and sentences and
these paper bullets of the brain awe a man from the
career of his humor? No! The world must be peopled.
When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not
think I should live till I were married. Here comes
Beatrice. By this day, she's a fair lady. I do spy some
marks of love in her.

[Enter Beatrice.]


BEATRICE  Against my will, I am sent to bid you come
in to dinner.

BENEDICK  Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.

BEATRICE  I took no more pains for those thanks than
you take pains to thank me. If it had been painful, I
would not have come.

BENEDICK  You take pleasure then in the message?

BEATRICE  Yea, just so much as you may take upon a
knife's point and choke a daw withal. You have no
stomach, signior. Fare you well.	[She exits.]

BENEDICK  Ha! "Against my will I am sent to bid you
come in to dinner." There's a double meaning in
that. "I took no more pains for those thanks than
you took pains to thank me." That's as much as to
say "Any pains that I take for you is as easy as
thanks." If I do not take pity of her, I am a villain; if I
do not love her, I am a Jew. I will go get her picture.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Hero and two gentlewomen, Margaret and Ursula.]


HERO
Good Margaret, run thee to the parlor.
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice
Proposing with the Prince and Claudio.
Whisper her ear and tell her I and Ursula
Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
Is all of her. Say that thou overheardst us,
And bid her steal into the pleached bower
Where honeysuckles ripened by the sun
Forbid the sun to enter, like favorites,
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Against that power that bred it. There will she hide
her
To listen our propose. This is thy office.
Bear thee well in it, and leave us alone.

MARGARET
I'll make her come, I warrant you, presently.
[She exits.]

HERO
Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
As we do trace this alley up and down,
Our talk must only be of Benedick.
When I do name him, let it be thy part
To praise him more than ever man did merit.
My talk to thee must be how Benedick
Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter
Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made,
That only wounds by hearsay. Now begin,
For look where Beatrice like a lapwing runs
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.

[Enter Beatrice, who hides in the bower.]


URSULA, [aside to Hero]
The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden oars the silver stream
And greedily devour the treacherous bait.
So angle we for Beatrice, who even now
Is couched in the woodbine coverture.
Fear you not my part of the dialogue.

HERO, [aside to Ursula]
Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.--
[They walk near the bower.]
No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful.
I know her spirits are as coy and wild
As haggards of the rock.

URSULA  But are you sure
That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely?

HERO
So says the Prince and my new-trothed lord.

URSULA
And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?

HERO
They did entreat me to acquaint her of it,
But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedick,
To wish him wrestle with affection
And never to let Beatrice know of it.

URSULA
Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?

HERO
O god of love! I know he doth deserve
As much as may be yielded to a man,
But Nature never framed a woman's heart
Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice.
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
Misprizing what they look on, and her wit
Values itself so highly that to her
All matter else seems weak. She cannot love,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
She is so self-endeared.

URSULA  Sure, I think so,
And therefore certainly it were not good
She knew his love, lest she'll make sport at it.

HERO
Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured,
But she would spell him backward. If fair-faced,
She would swear the gentleman should be her
sister;
If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antic,
Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed;
If low, an agate very vilely cut;
If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds;
If silent, why, a block moved with none.
So turns she every man the wrong side out,
And never gives to truth and virtue that
Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.

URSULA
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.

HERO
No, not to be so odd and from all fashions
As Beatrice is cannot be commendable.
But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
She would mock me into air. O, she would laugh
me
Out of myself, press me to death with wit.
Therefore let Benedick, like covered fire,
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly.
It were a better death than die with mocks,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.

URSULA
Yet tell her of it. Hear what she will say.

HERO
No, rather I will go to Benedick
And counsel him to fight against his passion;
And truly I'll devise some honest slanders
To stain my cousin with. One doth not know
How much an ill word may empoison liking.

URSULA
O, do not do your cousin such a wrong!
She cannot be so much without true judgment,
Having so swift and excellent a wit
As she is prized to have, as to refuse
So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.

HERO
He is the only man of Italy,
Always excepted my dear Claudio.

URSULA
I pray you be not angry with me, madam,
Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedick,
For shape, for bearing, argument, and valor,
Goes foremost in report through Italy.

HERO
Indeed, he hath an excellent good name.

URSULA
His excellence did earn it ere he had it.
When are you married, madam?

HERO
Why, every day, tomorrow. Come, go in.
I'll show thee some attires and have thy counsel
Which is the best to furnish me tomorrow.
[They move away from the bower.]

URSULA, [aside to Hero]
She's limed, I warrant you. We have caught her,
madam.

HERO, [aside to Ursula]
If it prove so, then loving goes by haps;
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
[Hero and Ursula exit.]

BEATRICE, [coming forward]
What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
   Stand I condemned for pride and scorn so much?
Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adieu!
   No glory lives behind the back of such.
And Benedick, love on; I will requite thee,
   Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand.
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
   To bind our loves up in a holy band.
For others say thou dost deserve, and I
Believe it better than reportingly.
[She exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Prince, Claudio, Benedick, and Leonato.]


PRINCE  I do but stay till your marriage be consummate,
and then go I toward Aragon.

CLAUDIO  I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe
me.

PRINCE  Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new
gloss of your marriage as to show a child his new
coat and forbid him to wear it. I will only be bold
with Benedick for his company, for from the crown
of his head to the sole of his foot he is all mirth. He
hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bowstring, and the
little hangman dare not shoot at him. He hath a
heart as sound as a bell, and his tongue is the
clapper, for what his heart thinks, his tongue
speaks.

BENEDICK  Gallants, I am not as I have been.

LEONATO  So say I. Methinks you are sadder.

CLAUDIO  I hope he be in love.

PRINCE  Hang him, truant! There's no true drop of
blood in him to be truly touched with love. If he be
sad, he wants money.

BENEDICK  I have the toothache.

PRINCE  Draw it.

BENEDICK  Hang it!

CLAUDIO  You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.

PRINCE  What, sigh for the toothache?

LEONATO  Where is but a humor or a worm.

BENEDICK  Well, everyone can master a grief but he
that has it.

CLAUDIO  Yet say I, he is in love.

PRINCE  There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless
it be a fancy that he hath to strange disguises, as to
be a Dutchman today, a Frenchman tomorrow, or
in the shape of two countries at once, as a German
from the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard
from the hip upward, no doublet. Unless he have a
fancy to this foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no
fool for fancy, as you would have it appear he is.

CLAUDIO  If he be not in love with some woman, there
is no believing old signs. He brushes his hat o'
mornings. What should that bode?

PRINCE  Hath any man seen him at the barber's?

CLAUDIO  No, but the barber's man hath been seen
with him, and the old ornament of his cheek hath
already stuffed tennis balls.

LEONATO  Indeed he looks younger than he did, by the
loss of a beard.

PRINCE  Nay, he rubs himself with civet. Can you smell
him out by that?

CLAUDIO  That's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in
love.

PRINCE  The greatest note of it is his melancholy.

CLAUDIO  And when was he wont to wash his face?

PRINCE  Yea, or to paint himself? For the which I hear
what they say of him.

CLAUDIO  Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is now crept
into a lute string and now governed by stops--

PRINCE  Indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him. Conclude,
conclude, he is in love.

CLAUDIO  Nay, but I know who loves him.

PRINCE  That would I know, too. I warrant, one that
knows him not.

CLAUDIO  Yes, and his ill conditions; and, in despite of
all, dies for him.

PRINCE  She shall be buried with her face upwards.

BENEDICK  Yet is this no charm for the toothache.--
Old signior, walk aside with me. I have studied eight
or nine wise words to speak to you, which these
hobby-horses must not hear.
[Benedick and Leonato exit.]

PRINCE  For my life, to break with him about Beatrice!

CLAUDIO  'Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this
played their parts with Beatrice, and then the two
bears will not bite one another when they meet.

[Enter John the Bastard.]


DON JOHN  My lord and brother, God save you.

PRINCE  Good e'en, brother.

DON JOHN  If your leisure served, I would speak with
you.

PRINCE  In private?

DON JOHN  If it please you. Yet Count Claudio may
hear, for what I would speak of concerns him.

PRINCE  What's the matter?

DON JOHN, [to Claudio]  Means your Lordship to be
married tomorrow?

PRINCE  You know he does.

DON JOHN  I know not that, when he knows what I
know.

CLAUDIO  If there be any impediment, I pray you discover
it.

DON JOHN  You may think I love you not. Let that
appear hereafter, and aim better at me by that I
now will manifest. For my brother, I think he holds
you well, and in dearness of heart hath holp to effect
your ensuing marriage--surely suit ill spent and
labor ill bestowed.

PRINCE  Why, what's the matter?

DON JOHN  I came hither to tell you; and, circumstances
shortened, for she has been too long
a-talking of, the lady is disloyal.

CLAUDIO  Who, Hero?

DON JOHN  Even she: Leonato's Hero, your Hero, every
man's Hero.

CLAUDIO  Disloyal?

DON JOHN  The word is too good to paint out her
wickedness. I could say she were worse. Think you
of a worse title, and I will fit her to it. Wonder not
till further warrant. Go but with me tonight, you
shall see her chamber window entered, even the
night before her wedding day. If you love her then,
tomorrow wed her. But it would better fit your
honor to change your mind.

CLAUDIO, [to Prince]  May this be so?

PRINCE  I will not think it.

DON JOHN  If you dare not trust that you see, confess
not that you know. If you will follow me, I will
show you enough, and when you have seen more
and heard more, proceed accordingly.

CLAUDIO  If I see anything tonight why I should not
marry her, tomorrow in the congregation, where I
should wed, there will I shame her.

PRINCE  And as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will
join with thee to disgrace her.

DON JOHN  I will disparage her no farther till you are
my witnesses. Bear it coldly but till midnight, and
let the issue show itself.

PRINCE  O day untowardly turned!

CLAUDIO  O mischief strangely thwarting!

DON JOHN  O plague right well prevented! So will you
say when you have seen the sequel.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Dogberry and his compartner Verges
with the Watch.]


DOGBERRY  Are you good men and true?

VERGES  Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer
salvation, body and soul.

DOGBERRY  Nay, that were a punishment too good for
them if they should have any allegiance in them,
being chosen for the Prince's watch.

VERGES  Well, give them their charge, neighbor
Dogberry.

DOGBERRY  First, who think you the most desartless
man to be constable?

FIRST WATCHMAN  Hugh Oatcake, sir, or George Seacoal,
for they can write and read.

DOGBERRY  Come hither, neighbor Seacoal. [Seacoal
steps forward.] God hath blessed you with a good
name. To be a well-favored man is the gift of
fortune, but to write and read comes by nature.

SEACOAL  Both which, master constable--

DOGBERRY  You have. I knew it would be your answer.
Well, for your favor, sir, why, give God thanks, and
make no boast of it, and for your writing and
reading, let that appear when there is no need of
such vanity. You are thought here to be the most
senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch;
therefore bear you the lantern. This is your charge:
you shall comprehend all vagrom men; you are to
bid any man stand, in the Prince's name.

SEACOAL  How if he will not stand?

DOGBERRY  Why, then, take no note of him, but let him
go, and presently call the rest of the watch together
and thank God you are rid of a knave.

VERGES  If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is
none of the Prince's subjects.

DOGBERRY  True, and they are to meddle with none but
the Prince's subjects.--You shall also make no
noise in the streets; for, for the watch to babble and
to talk is most tolerable and not to be endured.

SECOND WATCHMAN  We will rather sleep than talk.
We know what belongs to a watch.

DOGBERRY  Why, you speak like an ancient and most
quiet watchman, for I cannot see how sleeping
should offend; only have a care that your bills be not
stolen. Well, you are to call at all the alehouses and
bid those that are drunk get them to bed.

SEACOAL  How if they will not?

DOGBERRY  Why then, let them alone till they are sober.
If they make you not then the better answer, you
may say they are not the men you took them for.

SEACOAL  Well, sir.

DOGBERRY  If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by
virtue of your office, to be no true man, and for such
kind of men, the less you meddle or make with
them, why, the more is for your honesty.

SEACOAL  If we know him to be a thief, shall we not
lay hands on him?

DOGBERRY  Truly, by your office you may, but I think
they that touch pitch will be defiled. The most
peaceable way for you, if you do take a thief, is to
let him show himself what he is and steal out of
your company.

VERGES  You have been always called a merciful man,
partner.

DOGBERRY  Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will,
much more a man who hath any honesty in him.

VERGES, [to the Watch]  If you hear a child cry in the
night, you must call to the nurse and bid her still it.

SECOND WATCHMAN  How if the nurse be asleep and
will not hear us?

DOGBERRY  Why, then depart in peace, and let the
child wake her with crying, for the ewe that will
not hear her lamb when it baas will never answer a
calf when he bleats.

VERGES  'Tis very true.

DOGBERRY  This is the end of the charge. You, constable,
are to present the Prince's own person. If you
meet the Prince in the night, you may stay him.

VERGES  Nay, by 'r Lady, that I think he cannot.

DOGBERRY  Five shillings to one on 't, with any man that
knows the statutes, he may stay him--marry, not
without the Prince be willing, for indeed the watch
ought to offend no man, and it is an offense to stay a
man against his will.

VERGES  By 'r Lady, I think it be so.

DOGBERRY  Ha, ah ha!--Well, masters, goodnight. An
there be any matter of weight chances, call up me.
Keep your fellows' counsels and your own, and
goodnight.--Come, neighbor.
[Dogberry and Verges begin to exit.]

SEACOAL  Well, masters, we hear our charge. Let us go
sit here upon the church bench till two, and then all
to bed.

DOGBERRY  One word more, honest neighbors. I pray
you watch about Signior Leonato's door, for the
wedding being there tomorrow, there is a great coil
tonight. Adieu, be vigitant, I beseech you.
[Dogberry and Verges exit.]

[Enter Borachio and Conrade.]


BORACHIO  What, Conrade!

SEACOAL, [aside]  Peace, stir not.

BORACHIO  Conrade, I say!

CONRADE  Here, man, I am at thy elbow.

BORACHIO  Mass, and my elbow itched, I thought there
would a scab follow.

CONRADE  I will owe thee an answer for that. And now
forward with thy tale.

BORACHIO  Stand thee close, then, under this penthouse,
for it drizzles rain, and I will, like a true
drunkard, utter all to thee.

SEACOAL, [aside]  Some treason, masters. Yet stand
close.

BORACHIO  Therefore know, I have earned of Don
John a thousand ducats.

CONRADE  Is it possible that any villainy should be so
dear?

BORACHIO  Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible
any villainy should be so rich. For when rich
villains have need of poor ones, poor ones may
make what price they will.

CONRADE  I wonder at it.

BORACHIO  That shows thou art unconfirmed. Thou
knowest that the fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a
cloak, is nothing to a man.

CONRADE  Yes, it is apparel.

BORACHIO  I mean the fashion.

CONRADE  Yes, the fashion is the fashion.

BORACHIO  Tush, I may as well say the fool's the fool.
But seest thou not what a deformed thief this
fashion is?

FIRST WATCHMAN, [aside]  I know that Deformed. He
has been a vile thief this seven year. He goes up and
down like a gentleman. I remember his name.

BORACHIO  Didst thou not hear somebody?

CONRADE  No, 'twas the vane on the house.

BORACHIO  Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed thief
this fashion is, how giddily he turns about all the
hot bloods between fourteen and five-and-thirty,
sometimes fashioning them like Pharaoh's soldiers
in the reechy painting, sometimes like god Bel's
priests in the old church window, sometimes like
the shaven Hercules in the smirched worm-eaten
tapestry, where his codpiece seems as massy as his
club?

CONRADE  All this I see, and I see that the fashion wears
out more apparel than the man. But art not thou
thyself giddy with the fashion too, that thou hast
shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the
fashion?

BORACHIO  Not so, neither. But know that I have tonight
wooed Margaret, the Lady Hero's gentlewoman,
by the name of Hero. She leans me out at
her mistress' chamber window, bids me a thousand
times goodnight. I tell this tale vilely. I should first
tell thee how the Prince, Claudio, and my master,
planted and placed and possessed by my master
Don John, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable
amiable encounter.

CONRADE  And thought they Margaret was Hero?

BORACHIO  Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio,
but the devil my master knew she was Margaret;
and partly by his oaths, which first possessed them,
partly by the dark night, which did deceive them,
but chiefly by my villainy, which did confirm any
slander that Don John had made, away went Claudio
enraged, swore he would meet her as he was
appointed next morning at the temple, and there,
before the whole congregation, shame her with
what he saw o'ernight and send her home again
without a husband.

FIRST WATCHMAN  We charge you in the Prince's name
stand!

SEACOAL  Call up the right Master Constable. [Second
Watchman exits.] We have here recovered the most
dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known in
the commonwealth.

FIRST WATCHMAN  And one Deformed is one of them. I
know him; he wears a lock.

[Enter Dogberry, Verges, and Second Watchman.]


DOGBERRY  Masters, masters--

FIRST WATCHMAN, [to Borachio]  You'll be made bring
Deformed forth, I warrant you.

DOGBERRY, [to Borachio and Conrade]  Masters, never
speak, we charge you, let us obey you to go with us.

BORACHIO, [to Conrade]  We are like to prove a goodly
commodity, being taken up of these men's bills.

CONRADE  A commodity in question, I warrant you.--
Come, we'll obey you.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Hero, and Margaret, and Ursula.]


HERO  Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice and
desire her to rise.

URSULA  I will, lady.

HERO  And bid her come hither.

URSULA  Well.	[Ursula exits.]

MARGARET  Troth, I think your other rebato were
better.

HERO  No, pray thee, good Meg, I'll wear this.

MARGARET  By my troth, 's not so good, and I warrant
your cousin will say so.

HERO  My cousin's a fool, and thou art another. I'll
wear none but this.

MARGARET  I like the new tire within excellently, if the
hair were a thought browner; and your gown's a
most rare fashion, i' faith. I saw the Duchess of
Milan's gown that they praise so.

HERO  O, that exceeds, they say.

MARGARET  By my troth, 's but a nightgown in respect
of yours--cloth o' gold, and cuts, and laced with
silver, set with pearls, down sleeves, side sleeves,
and skirts round underborne with a bluish tinsel.
But for a fine, quaint, graceful, and excellent fashion,
yours is worth ten on 't.

HERO  God give me joy to wear it, for my heart is
exceeding heavy.

MARGARET  'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a
man.

HERO  Fie upon thee! Art not ashamed?

MARGARET  Of what, lady? Of speaking honorably? Is
not marriage honorable in a beggar? Is not your
lord honorable without marriage? I think you
would have me say "Saving your reverence, a husband."
An bad thinking do not wrest true speaking,
I'll offend nobody. Is there any harm in "the heavier
for a husband"? None, I think, an it be the right
husband and the right wife. Otherwise, 'tis light and
not heavy. Ask my lady Beatrice else. Here she
comes.

[Enter Beatrice.]


HERO  Good morrow, coz.

BEATRICE  Good morrow, sweet Hero.

HERO  Why, how now? Do you speak in the sick tune?

BEATRICE  I am out of all other tune, methinks.

MARGARET  Clap 's into "Light o' love." That goes
without a burden. Do you sing it, and I'll dance it.

BEATRICE  You light o' love with your heels! Then, if
your husband have stables enough, you'll see he
shall lack no barns.

MARGARET  O, illegitimate construction! I scorn that
with my heels.

BEATRICE  'Tis almost five o'clock, cousin. 'Tis time
you were ready. By my troth, I am exceeding ill.
Heigh-ho!

MARGARET  For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?

BEATRICE  For the letter that begins them all, H.

MARGARET  Well, an you be not turned Turk, there's no
more sailing by the star.

BEATRICE  What means the fool, trow?

MARGARET  Nothing, I; but God send everyone their
heart's desire.

HERO  These gloves the Count sent me, they are an
excellent perfume.

BEATRICE  I am stuffed, cousin. I cannot smell.

MARGARET  A maid, and stuffed! There's goodly catching
of cold.

BEATRICE  O, God help me, God help me! How long
have you professed apprehension?

MARGARET  Ever since you left it. Doth not my wit
become me rarely?

BEATRICE  It is not seen enough; you should wear it in
your cap. By my troth, I am sick.

MARGARET  Get you some of this distilled carduus benedictus
and lay it to your heart. It is the only thing for
a qualm.

HERO  There thou prick'st her with a thistle.

BEATRICE  Benedictus! Why benedictus? You have some
moral in this benedictus?

MARGARET  Moral? No, by my troth, I have no moral
meaning; I meant plain holy thistle. You may think
perchance that I think you are in love. Nay, by 'r
Lady, I am not such a fool to think what I list, nor I
list not to think what I can, nor indeed I cannot
think, if I would think my heart out of thinking, that
you are in love or that you will be in love or that you
can be in love. Yet Benedick was such another, and
now is he become a man. He swore he would never
marry, and yet now, in despite of his heart, he eats
his meat without grudging. And how you may be
converted I know not, but methinks you look with
your eyes as other women do.

BEATRICE  What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?

MARGARET  Not a false gallop.

[Enter Ursula.]


URSULA  Madam, withdraw. The Prince, the Count,
Signior Benedick, Don John, and all the gallants of
the town are come to fetch you to church.

HERO  Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good
Ursula.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Leonato, and Dogberry, the Constable, and
Verges, the Headborough.]


LEONATO  What would you with me, honest neighbor?

DOGBERRY  Marry, sir, I would have some confidence
with you that decerns you nearly.

LEONATO  Brief, I pray you, for you see it is a busy time
with me.

DOGBERRY  Marry, this it is, sir.

VERGES  Yes, in truth, it is, sir.

LEONATO  What is it, my good friends?

DOGBERRY  Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the
matter. An old man, sir, and his wits are not so blunt
as, God help, I would desire they were, but, in faith,
honest as the skin between his brows.

VERGES  Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man
living that is an old man and no honester than I.

DOGBERRY  Comparisons are odorous. Palabras, neighbor
Verges.

LEONATO  Neighbors, you are tedious.

DOGBERRY  It pleases your Worship to say so, but we
are the poor duke's officers. But truly, for mine
own part, if I were as tedious as a king, I could find
in my heart to bestow it all of your Worship.

LEONATO  All thy tediousness on me, ah?

DOGBERRY  Yea, an 'twere a thousand pound more
than 'tis, for I hear as good exclamation on your
Worship as of any man in the city, and though I be
but a poor man, I am glad to hear it.

VERGES  And so am I.

LEONATO  I would fain know what you have to say.

VERGES  Marry, sir, our watch tonight, excepting your
Worship's presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant
knaves as any in Messina.

DOGBERRY  A good old man, sir. He will be talking. As
they say, "When the age is in, the wit is out." God
help us, it is a world to see!--Well said, i' faith,
neighbor Verges.--Well, God's a good man. An two
men ride of a horse, one must ride behind. An
honest soul, i' faith, sir, by my troth he is, as ever
broke bread, but God is to be worshiped, all men
are not alike, alas, good neighbor.

LEONATO  Indeed, neighbor, he comes too short of you.

DOGBERRY  Gifts that God gives.

LEONATO  I must leave you.

DOGBERRY  One word, sir. Our watch, sir, have indeed
comprehended two aspicious persons, and we
would have them this morning examined before
your Worship.

LEONATO  Take their examination yourself and bring it
me. I am now in great haste, as it may appear unto
you.

DOGBERRY  It shall be suffigance.

LEONATO  Drink some wine ere you go. Fare you well.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  My lord, they stay for you to give your
daughter to her husband.

LEONATO  I'll wait upon them. I am ready.
[He exits, with the Messenger.]

DOGBERRY  Go, good partner, go, get you to Francis
Seacoal. Bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the
jail. We are now to examination these men.

VERGES  And we must do it wisely.

DOGBERRY  We will spare for no wit, I warrant you.
Here's that shall drive some of them to a noncome.
Only get the learned writer to set down our excommunication
and meet me at the jail.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Prince, John the Bastard, Leonato, Friar,
Claudio, Benedick, Hero, and Beatrice, with
Attendants.]


LEONATO  Come, Friar Francis, be brief, only to the
plain form of marriage, and you shall recount their
particular duties afterwards.

FRIAR, [to Claudio]  You come hither, my lord, to marry
this lady?

CLAUDIO  No.

LEONATO  To be married to her.--Friar, you come to
marry her.

FRIAR  Lady, you come hither to be married to this
count?

HERO  I do.

FRIAR  If either of you know any inward impediment
why you should not be conjoined, I charge you on
your souls to utter it.

CLAUDIO  Know you any, Hero?

HERO  None, my lord.

FRIAR  Know you any, count?

LEONATO  I dare make his answer, none.

CLAUDIO  O, what men dare do! What men may do!
What men daily do, not knowing what they do!

BENEDICK  How now, interjections? Why, then, some
be of laughing, as ah, ha, he!

CLAUDIO
Stand thee by, friar.--Father, by your leave,
Will you with free and unconstrained soul
Give me this maid, your daughter?

LEONATO
As freely, son, as God did give her me.

CLAUDIO
And what have I to give you back whose worth
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?

PRINCE
Nothing, unless you render her again.

CLAUDIO
Sweet prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.--
There, Leonato, take her back again.
Give not this rotten orange to your friend.
She's but the sign and semblance of her honor.
Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
O, what authority and show of truth
Can cunning sin cover itself withal!
Comes not that blood as modest evidence
To witness simple virtue? Would you not swear,
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
By these exterior shows? But she is none.
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed.
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.

LEONATO
What do you mean, my lord?

CLAUDIO  Not to be married,
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.

LEONATO
Dear my lord, if you in your own proof
Have vanquished the resistance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginity--

CLAUDIO
I know what you would say: if I have known her,
You will say she did embrace me as a husband,
And so extenuate the forehand sin.
No, Leonato,
I never tempted her with word too large,
But, as a brother to his sister, showed
Bashful sincerity and comely love.

HERO
And seemed I ever otherwise to you?

CLAUDIO
Out on thee, seeming! I will write against it.
You seem to me as Dian in her orb,
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown.
But you are more intemperate in your blood
Than Venus, or those pampered animals
That rage in savage sensuality.

HERO
Is my lord well that he doth speak so wide?

LEONATO
Sweet prince, why speak not you?

PRINCE  What should I
speak?
I stand dishonored that have gone about
To link my dear friend to a common stale.

LEONATO
Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?

DON JOHN
Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.

BENEDICK  This looks not like a nuptial.

HERO  True! O God!

CLAUDIO  Leonato, stand I here?
Is this the Prince? Is this the Prince's brother?
Is this face Hero's? Are our eyes our own?

LEONATO
All this is so, but what of this, my lord?

CLAUDIO
Let me but move one question to your daughter,
And by that fatherly and kindly power
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.

LEONATO
I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.

HERO
O, God defend me, how am I beset!--
What kind of catechizing call you this?

CLAUDIO
To make you answer truly to your name.

HERO
Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name
With any just reproach?

CLAUDIO  Marry, that can Hero!
Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue.
What man was he talked with you yesternight
Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.

HERO
I talked with no man at that hour, my lord.

PRINCE
Why, then, are you no maiden.--Leonato,
I am sorry you must hear. Upon mine honor,
Myself, my brother, and this grieved count
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window,
Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,
Confessed the vile encounters they have had
A thousand times in secret.

DON JOHN
Fie, fie, they are not to be named, my lord,
Not to be spoke of!
There is not chastity enough in language,
Without offense, to utter them.--Thus, pretty lady,
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.

CLAUDIO
O Hero, what a Hero hadst thou been
If half thy outward graces had been placed
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart!
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair. Farewell,
Thou pure impiety and impious purity.
For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
And never shall it more be gracious.

LEONATO
Hath no man's dagger here a point for me?
[Hero falls.]

BEATRICE
Why, how now, cousin, wherefore sink you down?

DON JOHN
Come, let us go. These things, come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up.
[Claudio, Prince, and Don John exit.]

BENEDICK
How doth the lady?

BEATRICE  Dead, I think.--Help, uncle!--
Hero, why Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! Friar!

LEONATO
O Fate, take not away thy heavy hand!
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
That may be wished for.

BEATRICE  How now, cousin Hero?	[Hero stirs.]

FRIAR, [to Hero]  Have comfort, lady.

LEONATO, [to Hero]
Dost thou look up?

FRIAR  Yea, wherefore should she not?

LEONATO
Wherefore? Why, doth not every earthly thing
Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
The story that is printed in her blood?--
Do not live, Hero, do not ope thine eyes,
For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
Myself would, on the rearward of reproaches,
Strike at thy life. Grieved I I had but one?
Chid I for that at frugal Nature's frame?
O, one too much by thee! Why had I one?
Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
Why had I not with charitable hand
Took up a beggar's issue at my gates,
Who, smirched thus, and mired with infamy,
I might have said "No part of it is mine;
This shame derives itself from unknown loins"?
But mine, and mine I loved, and mine I praised,
And mine that I was proud on, mine so much
That I myself was to myself not mine,
Valuing of her--why she, O she, is fall'n
Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again,
And salt too little which may season give
To her foul tainted flesh!

BENEDICK  Sir, sir, be patient.
For my part, I am so attired in wonder
I know not what to say.

BEATRICE
O, on my soul, my cousin is belied!

BENEDICK
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?

BEATRICE
No, truly not, although until last night
I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.

LEONATO
Confirmed, confirmed! O, that is stronger made
Which was before barred up with ribs of iron!
Would the two princes lie and Claudio lie,
Who loved her so that, speaking of her foulness,
Washed it with tears? Hence from her. Let her die!

FRIAR  Hear me a little,
For I have only silent been so long,
And given way unto this course of fortune,
By noting of the lady. I have marked
A thousand blushing apparitions
To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames
In angel whiteness beat away those blushes,
And in her eye there hath appeared a fire
To burn the errors that these princes hold
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool,
Trust not my reading nor my observations,
Which with experimental seal doth warrant
The tenor of my book; trust not my age,
My reverence, calling, nor divinity,
If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here
Under some biting error.

LEONATO  Friar, it cannot be.
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
Is that she will not add to her damnation
A sin of perjury. She not denies it.
Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse
That which appears in proper nakedness?

FRIAR
Lady, what man is he you are accused of?

HERO
They know that do accuse me. I know none.
If I know more of any man alive
Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
Let all my sins lack mercy!--O my father,
Prove you that any man with me conversed
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
Maintained the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!

FRIAR
There is some strange misprision in the princes.

BENEDICK
Two of them have the very bent of honor,
And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
The practice of it lives in John the Bastard,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.

LEONATO
I know not. If they speak but truth of her,
These hands shall tear her. If they wrong her honor,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
Nor age so eat up my invention,
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
But they shall find, awaked in such a kind,
Both strength of limb and policy of mind,
Ability in means and choice of friends,
To quit me of them throughly.

FRIAR  Pause awhile,
And let my counsel sway you in this case.
Your daughter here the princes left for dead.
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it that she is dead indeed.
Maintain a mourning ostentation,
And on your family's old monument
Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites
That appertain unto a burial.

LEONATO
What shall become of this? What will this do?

FRIAR
Marry, this well carried shall on her behalf
Change slander to remorse. That is some good.
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
But on this travail look for greater birth.
She, dying, as it must be so maintained,
Upon the instant that she was accused,
Shall be lamented, pitied, and excused
Of every hearer. For it so falls out
That what we have we prize not to the worth
Whiles we enjoy it, but being lacked and lost,
Why then we rack the value, then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio.
When he shall hear she died upon his words,
Th' idea of her life shall sweetly creep
Into his study of imagination,
And every lovely organ of her life
Shall come appareled in more precious habit,
More moving, delicate, and full of life,
Into the eye and prospect of his soul,
Than when she lived indeed. Then shall he mourn,
If ever love had interest in his liver,
And wish he had not so accused her,
No, though he thought his accusation true.
Let this be so, and doubt not but success
Will fashion the event in better shape
Than I can lay it down in likelihood.
But if all aim but this be leveled false,
The supposition of the lady's death
Will quench the wonder of her infamy.
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
As best befits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusive and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.

BENEDICK
Signior Leonato, let the Friar advise you.
And though you know my inwardness and love
Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio,
Yet, by mine honor, I will deal in this
As secretly and justly as your soul
Should with your body.

LEONATO  Being that I flow in grief,
The smallest twine may lead me.

FRIAR
'Tis well consented. Presently away,
   For to strange sores strangely they strain the
   cure.--
Come, lady, die to live. This wedding day
   Perhaps is but prolonged. Have patience and
   endure.
[All but Beatrice and Benedick exit.]

BENEDICK  Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?

BEATRICE  Yea, and I will weep a while longer.

BENEDICK  I will not desire that.

BEATRICE  You have no reason. I do it freely.

BENEDICK  Surely I do believe your fair cousin is
wronged.

BEATRICE  Ah, how much might the man deserve of me
that would right her!

BENEDICK  Is there any way to show such friendship?

BEATRICE  A very even way, but no such friend.

BENEDICK  May a man do it?

BEATRICE  It is a man's office, but not yours.

BENEDICK  I do love nothing in the world so well as
you. Is not that strange?

BEATRICE  As strange as the thing I know not. It were as
possible for me to say I loved nothing so well as you,
but believe me not, and yet I lie not; I confess
nothing, nor I deny nothing. I am sorry for my
cousin.

BENEDICK  By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me!

BEATRICE  Do not swear and eat it.

BENEDICK  I will swear by it that you love me, and I will
make him eat it that says I love not you.

BEATRICE  Will you not eat your word?

BENEDICK  With no sauce that can be devised to it. I
protest I love thee.

BEATRICE  Why then, God forgive me.

BENEDICK  What offense, sweet Beatrice?

BEATRICE  You have stayed me in a happy hour. I was
about to protest I loved you.

BENEDICK  And do it with all thy heart.

BEATRICE  I love you with so much of my heart that
none is left to protest.

BENEDICK  Come, bid me do anything for thee.

BEATRICE  Kill Claudio.

BENEDICK  Ha! Not for the wide world.

BEATRICE  You kill me to deny it. Farewell.
[She begins to exit.]

BENEDICK  Tarry, sweet Beatrice.

BEATRICE  I am gone, though I am here. There is no
love in you. Nay, I pray you let me go.

BENEDICK  Beatrice--

BEATRICE  In faith, I will go.

BENEDICK  We'll be friends first.

BEATRICE  You dare easier be friends with me than
fight with mine enemy.

BENEDICK  Is Claudio thine enemy?

BEATRICE  Is he not approved in the height a villain
that hath slandered, scorned, dishonored my kinswoman?
O, that I were a man! What, bear her in
hand until they come to take hands, and then, with
public accusation, uncovered slander, unmitigated
rancor--O God, that I were a man! I would eat his
heart in the marketplace.

BENEDICK  Hear me, Beatrice--

BEATRICE  Talk with a man out at a window! A proper
saying.

BENEDICK  Nay, but Beatrice--

BEATRICE  Sweet Hero, she is wronged, she is slandered,
she is undone.

BENEDICK  Beat--

BEATRICE  Princes and counties! Surely a princely testimony,
a goodly count, Count Comfect, a sweet
gallant, surely! O, that I were a man for his sake! Or
that I had any friend would be a man for my sake!
But manhood is melted into curtsies, valor into
compliment, and men are only turned into tongue,
and trim ones, too. He is now as valiant as Hercules
that only tells a lie and swears it. I cannot be a man
with wishing; therefore I will die a woman with
grieving.

BENEDICK  Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love
thee.

BEATRICE  Use it for my love some other way than
swearing by it.

BENEDICK  Think you in your soul the Count Claudio
hath wronged Hero?

BEATRICE  Yea, as sure as I have a thought or a soul.

BENEDICK  Enough, I am engaged. I will challenge
him. I will kiss your hand, and so I leave you. By
this hand, Claudio shall render me a dear account.
As you hear of me, so think of me. Go comfort your
cousin. I must say she is dead, and so farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter the Constables Dogberry and Verges, and the
Town Clerk, or Sexton, in gowns, with the Watch,
Conrade, and Borachio.]


DOGBERRY  Is our whole dissembly appeared?

VERGES  O, a stool and a cushion for the Sexton.
[A stool is brought in; the Sexton sits.]

SEXTON  Which be the malefactors?

DOGBERRY  Marry, that am I, and my partner.

VERGES  Nay, that's certain, we have the exhibition to
examine.

SEXTON  But which are the offenders that are to be
examined? Let them come before Master
Constable.

DOGBERRY  Yea, marry, let them come before me.
[Conrade and Borachio are brought forward.]
What is your name, friend?

BORACHIO  Borachio.

DOGBERRY  Pray, write down "Borachio."--Yours,
sirrah?

CONRADE  I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is
Conrade.

DOGBERRY  Write down "Master Gentleman Conrade."--
Masters, do you serve God?

BORACHIO/CONRADE  Yea, sir, we hope.

DOGBERRY  Write down that they hope they serve
God; and write God first, for God defend but God
should go before such villains!--Masters, it is
proved already that you are little better than false
knaves, and it will go near to be thought so shortly.
How answer you for yourselves?

CONRADE  Marry, sir, we say we are none.

DOGBERRY  A marvelous witty fellow, I assure you,
but I will go about with him.--Come you hither,
sirrah, a word in your ear. Sir, I say to you it is
thought you are false knaves.

BORACHIO  Sir, I say to you we are none.

DOGBERRY  Well, stand aside.--'Fore God, they are
both in a tale. Have you writ down that they are
none?

SEXTON  Master constable, you go not the way to
examine. You must call forth the watch that are
their accusers.

DOGBERRY  Yea, marry, that's the eftest way.--Let
the watch come forth. Masters, I charge you in the
Prince's name, accuse these men.

FIRST WATCHMAN  This man said, sir, that Don John, the
Prince's brother, was a villain.

DOGBERRY  Write down Prince John a villain. Why,
this is flat perjury, to call a prince's brother villain!

BORACHIO  Master constable--

DOGBERRY  Pray thee, fellow, peace. I do not like thy
look, I promise thee.

SEXTON, [to Watch]  What heard you him say else?

SEACOAL  Marry, that he had received a thousand
ducats of Don John for accusing the Lady Hero
wrongfully.

DOGBERRY  Flat burglary as ever was committed.

VERGES  Yea, by Mass, that it is.

SEXTON  What else, fellow?

FIRST WATCHMAN  And that Count Claudio did mean,
upon his words, to disgrace Hero before the whole
assembly, and not marry her.

DOGBERRY, [to Borachio]  O, villain! Thou wilt be condemned
into everlasting redemption for this!

SEXTON  What else?

SEACOAL  This is all.

SEXTON  And this is more, masters, than you can deny.
Prince John is this morning secretly stolen away.
Hero was in this manner accused, in this very
manner refused, and upon the grief of this suddenly
died.--Master constable, let these men be bound
and brought to Leonato's. I will go before and show
him their examination.	[He exits.]

DOGBERRY  Come, let them be opinioned.

VERGES  Let them be in the hands--

CONRADE  Off, coxcomb!

DOGBERRY  God's my life, where's the Sexton? Let
him write down the Prince's officer "coxcomb."
Come, bind them.--Thou naughty varlet!

CONRADE  Away! You are an ass, you are an ass!

DOGBERRY  Dost thou not suspect my place? Dost
thou not suspect my years? O, that he were here to
write me down an ass! But masters, remember that
I am an ass, though it be not written down, yet
forget not that I am an ass.--No, thou villain, thou
art full of piety, as shall be proved upon thee by
good witness. I am a wise fellow and, which is more,
an officer and, which is more, a householder and,
which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any is in
Messina, and one that knows the law, go to, and a
rich fellow enough, go to, and a fellow that hath had
losses, and one that hath two gowns and everything
handsome about him.--Bring him away.--O, that I
had been writ down an ass!
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Leonato and his brother.]


LEONATO'S BROTHER
If you go on thus, you will kill yourself,
And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief
Against yourself.

LEONATO  I pray thee, cease thy counsel,
Which falls into mine ears as profitless
As water in a sieve. Give not me counsel,
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
Bring me a father that so loved his child,
Whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine,
And bid him speak of patience.
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
And let it answer every strain for strain,
As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form.
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
Bid sorrow wag, cry "hem" when he should
groan,
Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
With candle-wasters, bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience.
But there is no such man. For, brother, men
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
Which they themselves not feel, but tasting it,
Their counsel turns to passion, which before
Would give preceptial med'cine to rage,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with air and agony with words.
No, no, 'tis all men's office to speak patience
To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
To be so moral when he shall endure
The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel.
My griefs cry louder than advertisement.

LEONATO'S BROTHER
Therein do men from children nothing differ.

LEONATO
I pray thee, peace. I will be flesh and blood,
For there was never yet philosopher
That could endure the toothache patiently,
However they have writ the style of gods
And made a push at chance and sufferance.

LEONATO'S BROTHER
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself.
Make those that do offend you suffer too.

LEONATO
There thou speak'st reason. Nay, I will do so.
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied,
And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince
And all of them that thus dishonor her.

[Enter Prince and Claudio.]


LEONATO'S BROTHER
Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.

PRINCE
Good e'en, good e'en.

CLAUDIO  Good day to both of you.

LEONATO
Hear you, my lords--

PRINCE  We have some haste,
Leonato.

LEONATO
Some haste, my lord! Well, fare you well, my lord.
Are you so hasty now? Well, all is one.

PRINCE
Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.

LEONATO'S BROTHER
If he could right himself with quarrelling,
Some of us would lie low.

CLAUDIO  Who wrongs him?

LEONATO
Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou.
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword.
I fear thee not.

CLAUDIO  Marry, beshrew my hand
If it should give your age such cause of fear.
In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.

LEONATO
Tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me.
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool,
As under privilege of age to brag
What I have done being young, or what would do
Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head,
Thou hast so wronged mine innocent child and me
That I am forced to lay my reverence by,
And with gray hairs and bruise of many days
Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child.
Thy slander hath gone through and through her
heart,
And she lies buried with her ancestors,
O, in a tomb where never scandal slept,
Save this of hers, framed by thy villainy.

CLAUDIO
My villainy?

LEONATO  Thine, Claudio, thine, I say.

PRINCE
You say not right, old man.

LEONATO  My lord, my lord,
I'll prove it on his body if he dare,
Despite his nice fence and his active practice,
His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.

CLAUDIO
Away! I will not have to do with you.

LEONATO
Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast killed my child.
If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.

LEONATO'S BROTHER
He shall kill two of us, and men indeed,
But that's no matter. Let him kill one first.
Win me and wear me! Let him answer me.--
Come, follow me, boy. Come, sir boy, come, follow
me.
Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence,
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.

LEONATO  Brother--

LEONATO'S BROTHER
Content yourself. God knows I loved my niece,
And she is dead, slandered to death by villains
That dare as well answer a man indeed
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.--
Boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!

LEONATO  Brother Anthony--

LEONATO'S BROTHER
Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple--
Scambling, outfacing, fashionmonging boys,
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
Go anticly and show outward hideousness,
And speak off half a dozen dang'rous words
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst,
And this is all.

LEONATO  But brother Anthony--

LEONATO'S BROTHER  Come, 'tis no matter.
Do not you meddle. Let me deal in this.

PRINCE
Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
My heart is sorry for your daughter's death,
But, on my honor, she was charged with nothing
But what was true and very full of proof.

LEONATO  My lord, my lord--

PRINCE  I will not hear you.

LEONATO
No? Come, brother, away. I will be heard.

LEONATO'S BROTHER
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
[Leonato and his brother exit.]

[Enter Benedick.]


PRINCE
See, see, here comes the man we went to seek.

CLAUDIO  Now, signior, what news?

BENEDICK, [to Prince]  Good day, my lord.

PRINCE  Welcome, signior. You are almost come to
part almost a fray.

CLAUDIO  We had like to have had our two noses
snapped off with two old men without teeth.

PRINCE  Leonato and his brother. What think'st thou?
Had we fought, I doubt we should have been too
young for them.

BENEDICK  In a false quarrel there is no true valor. I
came to seek you both.

CLAUDIO  We have been up and down to seek thee, for
we are high-proof melancholy and would fain have
it beaten away. Wilt thou use thy wit?

BENEDICK  It is in my scabbard. Shall I draw it?

PRINCE  Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?

CLAUDIO  Never any did so, though very many have
been beside their wit. I will bid thee draw, as we do
the minstrels: draw to pleasure us.

PRINCE  As I am an honest man, he looks pale.--Art
thou sick, or angry?

CLAUDIO, [to Benedick]  What, courage, man! What
though care killed a cat? Thou hast mettle enough
in thee to kill care.

BENEDICK  Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, an
you charge it against me. I pray you, choose another
subject.

CLAUDIO, [to Prince]  Nay, then, give him another staff.
This last was broke 'cross.

PRINCE  By this light, he changes more and more. I
think he be angry indeed.

CLAUDIO  If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.

BENEDICK  Shall I speak a word in your ear?

CLAUDIO  God bless me from a challenge!

BENEDICK, [aside to Claudio]  You are a villain. I jest
not. I will make it good how you dare, with what you
dare, and when you dare. Do me right, or I will
protest your cowardice. You have killed a sweet
lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me
hear from you.

CLAUDIO  Well, I will meet you, so I may have good
cheer.

PRINCE  What, a feast, a feast?

CLAUDIO  I' faith, I thank him. He hath bid me to a
calf's head and a capon, the which if I do not carve
most curiously, say my knife's naught. Shall I not
find a woodcock too?

BENEDICK  Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.

PRINCE  I'll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the
other day. I said thou hadst a fine wit. "True," said
she, "a fine little one." "No," said I, "a great wit."
"Right," says she, "a great gross one." "Nay," said I,
"a good wit." "Just," said she, "it hurts nobody."
"Nay," said I, "the gentleman is wise." "Certain,"
said she, "a wise gentleman." "Nay," said I, "he
hath the tongues." "That I believe," said she, "for he
swore a thing to me on Monday night which he
forswore on Tuesday morning; there's a double
tongue, there's two tongues." Thus did she an hour
together transshape thy particular virtues. Yet at
last she concluded with a sigh, thou wast the
proper'st man in Italy.

CLAUDIO  For the which she wept heartily and said she
cared not.

PRINCE  Yea, that she did. But yet for all that, an if she
did not hate him deadly, she would love him
dearly. The old man's daughter told us all.

CLAUDIO  All, all. And, moreover, God saw him when
he was hid in the garden.

PRINCE  But when shall we set the savage bull's horns
on the sensible Benedick's head?

CLAUDIO  Yea, and text underneath: "Here dwells Benedick,
the married man"?

BENEDICK  Fare you well, boy. You know my mind. I
will leave you now to your gossip-like humor. You
break jests as braggarts do their blades, which, God
be thanked, hurt not.--My lord, for your many
courtesies I thank you. I must discontinue your
company. Your brother the Bastard is fled from
Messina. You have among you killed a sweet and
innocent lady. For my Lord Lackbeard there, he and
I shall meet, and till then peace be with him.
[Benedick exits.]

PRINCE  He is in earnest.

CLAUDIO  In most profound earnest, and, I'll warrant
you, for the love of Beatrice.

PRINCE  And hath challenged thee?

CLAUDIO  Most sincerely.

PRINCE  What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his
doublet and hose and leaves off his wit!

CLAUDIO  He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape
a doctor to such a man.

PRINCE  But soft you, let me be. Pluck up, my heart,
and be sad. Did he not say my brother was fled?

[Enter Constables Dogberry and Verges, and the Watch,
with Conrade and Borachio.]


DOGBERRY  Come you, sir. If justice cannot tame you,
she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance.
Nay, an you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must
be looked to.

PRINCE  How now, two of my brother's men bound?
Borachio one!

CLAUDIO  Hearken after their offense, my lord.

PRINCE  Officers, what offense have these men done?

DOGBERRY  Marry, sir, they have committed false
report; moreover, they have spoken untruths;
secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and lastly, they
have belied a lady; thirdly, they have verified unjust
things; and, to conclude, they are lying knaves.

PRINCE  First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I
ask thee what's their offense; sixth and lastly, why
they are committed; and, to conclude, what you lay
to their charge.

CLAUDIO  Rightly reasoned, and in his own division;
and, by my troth, there's one meaning well suited.

PRINCE, [to Borachio and Conrade]  Who have you offended,
masters, that you are thus bound to your
answer? This learned constable is too cunning to be
understood. What's your offense?

BORACHIO  Sweet prince, let me go no farther to mine
answer. Do you hear me, and let this count kill me.
I have deceived even your very eyes. What your
wisdoms could not discover, these shallow fools
have brought to light, who in the night overheard
me confessing to this man how Don John your
brother incensed me to slander the Lady Hero, how
you were brought into the orchard and saw me
court Margaret in Hero's garments, how you disgraced
her when you should marry her. My villainy
they have upon record, which I had rather seal with
my death than repeat over to my shame. The lady is
dead upon mine and my master's false accusation.
And, briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a
villain.

PRINCE, [to Claudio]
Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?

CLAUDIO
I have drunk poison whiles he uttered it.

PRINCE, [to Borachio]
But did my brother set thee on to this?

BORACHIO  Yea, and paid me richly for the practice of
it.

PRINCE
He is composed and framed of treachery,
And fled he is upon this villainy.

CLAUDIO
Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appear
In the rare semblance that I loved it first.

DOGBERRY  Come, bring away the plaintiffs. By this
time our sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of
the matter. And, masters, do not forget to specify,
when time and place shall serve, that I am an ass.

VERGES  Here, here comes Master Signior Leonato,
and the Sexton too.

[Enter Leonato, his brother, and the Sexton.]


LEONATO
Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes,
That, when I note another man like him,
I may avoid him. Which of these is he?

BORACHIO
If you would know your wronger, look on me.

LEONATO
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast killed
Mine innocent child?

BORACHIO  Yea, even I alone.

LEONATO
No, not so, villain, thou beliest thyself.
Here stand a pair of honorable men--
A third is fled--that had a hand in it.--
I thank you, princes, for my daughter's death.
Record it with your high and worthy deeds.
'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.

CLAUDIO
I know not how to pray your patience,
Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself.
Impose me to what penance your invention
Can lay upon my sin. Yet sinned I not
But in mistaking.

PRINCE  By my soul, nor I,
And yet to satisfy this good old man
I would bend under any heavy weight
That he'll enjoin me to.

LEONATO
I cannot bid you bid my daughter live--
That were impossible--but, I pray you both,
Possess the people in Messina here
How innocent she died. And if your love
Can labor aught in sad invention,
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb
And sing it to her bones. Sing it tonight.
Tomorrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son-in-law,
Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter,
Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
And she alone is heir to both of us.
Give her the right you should have giv'n her cousin,
And so dies my revenge.

CLAUDIO  O, noble sir!
Your overkindness doth wring tears from me.
I do embrace your offer and dispose
For henceforth of poor Claudio.

LEONATO
Tomorrow then I will expect your coming.
Tonight I take my leave. This naughty man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I believe was packed in all this wrong,
Hired to it by your brother.

BORACHIO  No, by my soul, she was not,
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
But always hath been just and virtuous
In anything that I do know by her.

DOGBERRY, [to Leonato]  Moreover, sir, which indeed is
not under white and black, this plaintiff here, the
offender, did call me ass. I beseech you, let it be
remembered in his punishment. And also the watch
heard them talk of one Deformed. They say he
wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it and
borrows money in God's name, the which he hath
used so long and never paid that now men grow
hardhearted and will lend nothing for God's sake.
Pray you, examine him upon that point.

LEONATO  I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.

DOGBERRY  Your Worship speaks like a most thankful
and reverent youth, and I praise God for you.

LEONATO, [giving him money]  There's for thy pains.

DOGBERRY  God save the foundation.

LEONATO  Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I
thank thee.

DOGBERRY  I leave an arrant knave with your Worship,
which I beseech your Worship to correct
yourself, for the example of others. God keep your
Worship! I wish your Worship well. God restore you
to health. I humbly give you leave to depart, and if a
merry meeting may be wished, God prohibit it.--
Come, neighbor.	[Dogberry and Verges exit.]

LEONATO
Until tomorrow morning, lords, farewell.

LEONATO'S BROTHER
Farewell, my lords. We look for you tomorrow.

PRINCE
We will not fail.

CLAUDIO  Tonight I'll mourn with Hero.

LEONATO, [to Watch]
Bring you these fellows on.--We'll talk with
Margaret,
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Benedick and Margaret.]


BENEDICK  Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve
well at my hands by helping me to the speech of
Beatrice.

MARGARET  Will you then write me a sonnet in praise
of my beauty?

BENEDICK  In so high a style, Margaret, that no man
living shall come over it, for in most comely truth
thou deservest it.

MARGARET  To have no man come over me? Why, shall I
always keep below stairs?

BENEDICK  Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's
mouth; it catches.

MARGARET  And yours as blunt as the fencer's foils,
which hit but hurt not.

BENEDICK  A most manly wit, Margaret; it will not hurt
a woman. And so, I pray thee, call Beatrice. I give
thee the bucklers.

MARGARET  Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our
own.

BENEDICK  If you use them, Margaret, you must put in
the pikes with a vice, and they are dangerous
weapons for maids.

MARGARET  Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I
think hath legs.

BENEDICK  And therefore will come.
[Margaret exits.]
[Sings]	   The god of love
	   That sits above,
	And knows me, and knows me,
	   How pitiful I deserve--
I mean in singing. But in loving, Leander the good
swimmer, Troilus the first employer of panders, and
a whole book full of these quondam carpetmongers,
whose names yet run smoothly in the even
road of a blank verse, why, they were never so truly
turned over and over as my poor self in love. Marry,
I cannot show it in rhyme. I have tried. I can find out
no rhyme to "lady" but "baby"--an innocent
rhyme; for "scorn," "horn"--a hard rhyme; for
"school," "fool"--a babbling rhyme; very ominous
endings. No, I was not born under a rhyming
planet, nor I cannot woo in festival terms.

[Enter Beatrice.]

Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called
thee?

BEATRICE  Yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.

BENEDICK  O, stay but till then!

BEATRICE  "Then" is spoken. Fare you well now. And
yet, ere I go, let me go with that I came, which is,
with knowing what hath passed between you and
Claudio.

BENEDICK  Only foul words, and thereupon I will kiss
thee.

BEATRICE  Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is
but foul breath, and foul breath is noisome. Therefore
I will depart unkissed.

BENEDICK  Thou hast frighted the word out of his right
sense, so forcible is thy wit. But I must tell thee
plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either
I must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe
him a coward. And I pray thee now tell me, for
which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love
with me?

BEATRICE  For them all together, which maintained so
politic a state of evil that they will not admit any
good part to intermingle with them. But for which
of my good parts did you first suffer love for me?

BENEDICK  Suffer love! A good epithet. I do suffer love
indeed, for I love thee against my will.

BEATRICE  In spite of your heart, I think. Alas, poor
heart, if you spite it for my sake, I will spite it for
yours, for I will never love that which my friend
hates.

BENEDICK  Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.

BEATRICE  It appears not in this confession. There's not
one wise man among twenty that will praise
himself.

BENEDICK  An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that lived
in the time of good neighbors. If a man do not erect
in this age his own tomb ere he dies, he shall live no
longer in monument than the bell rings and the
widow weeps.

BEATRICE  And how long is that, think you?

BENEDICK  Question: why, an hour in clamor and a
quarter in rheum. Therefore is it most expedient for
the wise, if Don Worm, his conscience, find no
impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet of
his own virtues, as I am to myself. So much for
praising myself, who, I myself will bear witness, is
praiseworthy. And now tell me, how doth your
cousin?

BEATRICE  Very ill.

BENEDICK  And how do you?

BEATRICE  Very ill, too.

BENEDICK  Serve God, love me, and mend. There will I
leave you too, for here comes one in haste.

[Enter Ursula.]


URSULA  Madam, you must come to your uncle. Yonder's
old coil at home. It is proved my Lady Hero
hath been falsely accused, the Prince and Claudio
mightily abused, and Don John is the author of all,
who is fled and gone. Will you come presently?
[Ursula exits.]

BEATRICE  Will you go hear this news, signior?

BENEDICK  I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be
buried in thy eyes--and, moreover, I will go with
thee to thy uncle's.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Claudio, Prince, and three or four Lords with
tapers, and Musicians.]


CLAUDIO  Is this the monument of Leonato?

FIRST LORD  It is, my lord.

CLAUDIO, [reading an Epitaph.]

	Done to death by slanderous tongues
	   Was the Hero that here lies.
	Death, in guerdon of her wrongs,
	   Gives her fame which never dies.
	So the life that died with shame
	Lives in death with glorious fame.
[He hangs up the scroll.]
Hang thou there upon the tomb,
Praising her when I am dumb.
Now music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn.

Song

	Pardon, goddess of the night,
	Those that slew thy virgin knight,
	For the which with songs of woe,
	Round about her tomb they go.
	   Midnight, assist our moan.
	   Help us to sigh and groan
	      Heavily, heavily.
	   Graves, yawn and yield your dead,
	   Till death be uttered,
	      Heavily, heavily.

CLAUDIO
Now, unto thy bones, goodnight.
Yearly will I do this rite.

PRINCE
Good morrow, masters. Put your torches out.
   The wolves have preyed, and look, the gentle day
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
   Dapples the drowsy east with spots of gray.
Thanks to you all, and leave us. Fare you well.

CLAUDIO
Good morrow, masters. Each his several way.
[Lords and Musicians exit.]

PRINCE
Come, let us hence, and put on other weeds,
   And then to Leonato's we will go.

CLAUDIO
And Hymen now with luckier issue speed 's,
   Than this for whom we rendered up this woe.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Leonato, Benedick, Beatrice, Margaret, Ursula,
Leonato's brother, Friar, Hero.]


FRIAR
Did I not tell you she was innocent?

LEONATO
So are the Prince and Claudio, who accused her
Upon the error that you heard debated.
But Margaret was in some fault for this,
Although against her will, as it appears
In the true course of all the question.

LEONATO'S BROTHER
Well, I am glad that all things sorts so well.

BENEDICK
And so am I, being else by faith enforced
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.

LEONATO
Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
And when I send for you, come hither masked.
The Prince and Claudio promised by this hour
To visit me.--You know your office, brother.
You must be father to your brother's daughter,
And give her to young Claudio.	[The ladies exit.]

LEONATO'S BROTHER
Which I will do with confirmed countenance.

BENEDICK
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.

FRIAR  To do what, signior?

BENEDICK
To bind me, or undo me, one of them.--
Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favor.

LEONATO
That eye my daughter lent her; 'tis most true.

BENEDICK
And I do with an eye of love requite her.

LEONATO
The sight whereof I think you had from me,
From Claudio, and the Prince. But what's your will?

BENEDICK
Your answer, sir, is enigmatical.
But for my will, my will is your goodwill
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoined
In the state of honorable marriage--
In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.

LEONATO
My heart is with your liking.

FRIAR  And my help.
Here comes the Prince and Claudio.

[Enter Prince, and Claudio, and two or three other.]


PRINCE  Good morrow to this fair assembly.

LEONATO
Good morrow, prince; good morrow, Claudio.
We here attend you. Are you yet determined
Today to marry with my brother's daughter?

CLAUDIO
I'll hold my mind were she an Ethiope.

LEONATO
Call her forth, brother. Here's the Friar ready.
[Leonato's brother exits.]

PRINCE
Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what's the matter
That you have such a February face,
So full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness?

CLAUDIO
I think he thinks upon the savage bull.
Tush, fear not, man. We'll tip thy horns with gold,
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
As once Europa did at lusty Jove
When he would play the noble beast in love.

BENEDICK
Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low,
And some such strange bull leapt your father's cow
And got a calf in that same noble feat
Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.

CLAUDIO
For this I owe you. Here comes other reck'nings.

[Enter Leonato's brother, Hero, Beatrice, Margaret,
Ursula, the ladies masked.]

Which is the lady I must seize upon?

LEONATO
This same is she, and I do give you her.

CLAUDIO
Why, then, she's mine.--Sweet, let me see your face.

LEONATO
No, that you shall not till you take her hand
Before this friar and swear to marry her.

CLAUDIO, [to Hero]
Give me your hand before this holy friar.
[They take hands.]
I am your husband, if you like of me.

HERO
And when I lived, I was your other wife,
And when you loved, you were my other husband.
[She unmasks.]

CLAUDIO
Another Hero!

HERO  Nothing certainer.
One Hero died defiled, but I do live,
And surely as I live, I am a maid.

PRINCE
The former Hero! Hero that is dead!

LEONATO
She died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.

FRIAR
All this amazement can I qualify,
When after that the holy rites are ended,
I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death.
Meantime let wonder seem familiar,
And to the chapel let us presently.

BENEDICK
Soft and fair, friar.--Which is Beatrice?

BEATRICE, [unmasking]
I answer to that name. What is your will?

BENEDICK
Do not you love me?

BEATRICE  Why no, no more than reason.

BENEDICK
Why then, your uncle and the Prince and Claudio
Have been deceived. They swore you did.

BEATRICE
Do not you love me?

BENEDICK  Troth, no, no more than reason.

BEATRICE
Why then, my cousin, Margaret, and Ursula
Are much deceived, for they did swear you did.

BENEDICK
They swore that you were almost sick for me.

BEATRICE
They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.

BENEDICK
'Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?

BEATRICE
No, truly, but in friendly recompense.

LEONATO
Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.

CLAUDIO
And I'll be sworn upon 't that he loves her,
For here's a paper written in his hand,
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
Fashioned to Beatrice.	[He shows a paper.]

HERO  And here's another,
Writ in my cousin's hand, stol'n from her pocket,
Containing her affection unto Benedick.
[She shows a paper.]

BENEDICK  A miracle! Here's our own hands against
our hearts. Come, I will have thee, but by this light
I take thee for pity.

BEATRICE  I would not deny you, but by this good day, I
yield upon great persuasion, and partly to save your
life, for I was told you were in a consumption.

BENEDICK  Peace! I will stop your mouth.
[They kiss.]

PRINCE
How dost thou, Benedick, the married man?

BENEDICK  I'll tell thee what, prince: a college of
wit-crackers cannot flout me out of my humor.
Dost thou think I care for a satire or an epigram?
No. If a man will be beaten with brains, he shall
wear nothing handsome about him. In brief, since I
do purpose to marry, I will think nothing to any
purpose that the world can say against it, and
therefore never flout at me for what I have said
against it. For man is a giddy thing, and this is my
conclusion.--For thy part, Claudio, I did think to
have beaten thee, but in that thou art like to be my
kinsman, live unbruised, and love my cousin.

CLAUDIO  I had well hoped thou wouldst have denied
Beatrice, that I might have cudgeled thee out of thy
single life, to make thee a double-dealer, which out
of question thou wilt be, if my cousin do not look
exceeding narrowly to thee.

BENEDICK  Come, come, we are friends. Let's have a
dance ere we are married, that we may lighten our
own hearts and our wives' heels.

LEONATO  We'll have dancing afterward.

BENEDICK  First, of my word! Therefore play, music.--
Prince, thou art sad. Get thee a wife, get thee a wife.
There is no staff more reverend than one tipped
with horn.

[Enter Messenger.]


MESSENGER, [to Prince]
My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight,
And brought with armed men back to Messina.

BENEDICK, [to Prince]  Think not on him till tomorrow.
I'll devise thee brave punishments for him.--Strike
up, pipers!	[Music plays. They dance.]
[They exit.]

Antony and Cleopatra
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/antony-and-cleopatra/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
ANTONY, a triumvir of Rome
CLEOPATRA, Queen of Egypt
OCTAVIUS CAESAR, a triumvir of Rome
OCTAVIA, sister to Caesar, later wife to Antony
LEPIDUS, a triumvir of Rome
ENOBARBUS, also called DOMITIUS
Accompanying Antony in Egypt and elsewhere:
  VENTIDIUS
  SILIUS
  EROS
  CANIDIUS
  SCARUS
  DERCETUS
  DEMETRIUS
  PHILO
  A SCHOOLMASTER, Antony's AMBASSADOR to Caesar
Serving in Cleopatra's court:
  CHARMIAN
  IRAS
  ALEXAS
  MARDIAN, a Eunuch
  SELEUCUS, Cleopatra's treasurer
  DIOMEDES
Supporting and accompanying Caesar:
  MAECENAS
  AGRIPPA
  TAURUS
  THIDIAS
  DOLABELLA
  GALLUS
  PROCULEIUS
SEXTUS POMPEIUS, also called POMPEY
MENAS
MENECRATES
VARRIUS
MESSENGERS
SOLDIERS
SENTRIES
GUARDSMEN
A SOOTHSAYER
SERVANTS
A BOY
A CAPTAIN
AN EGYPTIAN
A COUNTRYMAN
Ladies, Eunuchs, Captains, Officers, Soldiers, Attendants, Servants (Lamprius, Rannius, Lucillius: mute characters named in the opening stage direction to 1.2)


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Demetrius and Philo.]


PHILO
Nay, but this dotage of our general's
O'erflows the measure. Those his goodly eyes,
That o'er the files and musters of the war
Have glowed like plated Mars, now bend, now turn
The office and devotion of their view
Upon a tawny front. His captain's heart,
Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper
And is become the bellows and the fan
To cool a gypsy's lust.

[Flourish. Enter Antony, Cleopatra, her Ladies, the Train,
with Eunuchs fanning her.]

Look where they come.
Take but good note, and you shall see in him
The triple pillar of the world transformed
Into a strumpet's fool. Behold and see.

CLEOPATRA
If it be love indeed, tell me how much.

ANTONY
There's beggary in the love that can be reckoned.

CLEOPATRA
I'll set a bourn how far to be beloved.

ANTONY
Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new
Earth.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  News, my good lord, from Rome.

ANTONY  Grates me, the sum.

CLEOPATRA  Nay, hear them, Antony.
Fulvia perchance is angry. Or who knows
If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
His powerful mandate to you: "Do this, or this;
Take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that.
Perform 't, or else we damn thee."

ANTONY  How, my love?

CLEOPATRA  Perchance? Nay, and most like.
You must not stay here longer; your dismission
Is come from Caesar. Therefore hear it, Antony.
Where's Fulvia's process? Caesar's, I would say--
both?
Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt's queen,
Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine
Is Caesar's homager; else so thy cheek pays shame
When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!

ANTONY
Let Rome in Tiber melt and the wide arch
Of the ranged empire fall. Here is my space.
Kingdoms are clay. Our dungy earth alike
Feeds beast as man. The nobleness of life
Is to do thus; when such a mutual pair
And such a twain can do 't, in which I bind,
On pain of punishment, the world to weet
We stand up peerless.

CLEOPATRA  Excellent falsehood!
Why did he marry Fulvia and not love her?
I'll seem the fool I am not. Antony
Will be himself.

ANTONY  But stirred by Cleopatra.
Now for the love of Love and her soft hours,
Let's not confound the time with conference harsh.
There's not a minute of our lives should stretch
Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?

CLEOPATRA
Hear the ambassadors.

ANTONY  Fie, wrangling queen,
Whom everything becomes--to chide, to laugh,
To weep; whose every passion fully strives
To make itself, in thee, fair and admired!
No messenger but thine, and all alone
Tonight we'll wander through the streets and note
The qualities of people. Come, my queen,
Last night you did desire it. [To the Messenger.]
Speak not to us.
[Antony and Cleopatra exit with the Train.]

DEMETRIUS
Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?

PHILO
Sir, sometimes when he is not Antony
He comes too short of that great property
Which still should go with Antony.

DEMETRIUS  I am full sorry
That he approves the common liar who
Thus speaks of him at Rome; but I will hope
Of better deeds tomorrow. Rest you happy!
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Enobarbus, Lamprius, a Soothsayer, Rannius,
Lucillius, Charmian, Iras, Mardian the Eunuch, Alexas,
and Servants.]


CHARMIAN  Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything
Alexas, almost most absolute Alexas, where's the
soothsayer that you praised so to th' Queen? O, that
I knew this husband which you say must charge
his horns with garlands!

ALEXAS  Soothsayer!

SOOTHSAYER  Your will?

CHARMIAN
Is this the man?--Is 't you, sir, that know things?

SOOTHSAYER
In nature's infinite book of secrecy
A little I can read.

ALEXAS, [to Charmian]  Show him your hand.

ENOBARBUS, [to Servants]
Bring in the banquet quickly, wine enough
Cleopatra's health to drink.

CHARMIAN, [giving her hand to the Soothsayer]  Good sir,
give me good fortune.

SOOTHSAYER  I make not, but foresee.

CHARMIAN  Pray then, foresee me one.

SOOTHSAYER
You shall be yet far fairer than you are.

CHARMIAN  He means in flesh.

IRAS  No, you shall paint when you are old.

CHARMIAN  Wrinkles forbid!

ALEXAS  Vex not his prescience. Be attentive.

CHARMIAN  Hush.

SOOTHSAYER
You shall be more beloving than beloved.

CHARMIAN  I had rather heat my liver with drinking.

ALEXAS  Nay, hear him.

CHARMIAN  Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me
be married to three kings in a forenoon and widow
them all. Let me have a child at fifty to whom Herod
of Jewry may do homage. Find me to marry me
with Octavius Caesar, and companion me with my
mistress.

SOOTHSAYER
You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.

CHARMIAN  O, excellent! I love long life better than figs.

SOOTHSAYER
You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune
Than that which is to approach.

CHARMIAN  Then belike my children shall have no
names. Prithee, how many boys and wenches must
I have?

SOOTHSAYER
If every of your wishes had a womb,
And fertile every wish, a million.

CHARMIAN  Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.

ALEXAS  You think none but your sheets are privy to
your wishes.

CHARMIAN, [to Soothsayer]  Nay, come. Tell Iras hers.

ALEXAS  We'll know all our fortunes.

ENOBARBUS  Mine, and most of our fortunes tonight,
shall be--drunk to bed.

IRAS, [giving her hand to the Soothsayer]  There's a palm
presages chastity, if nothing else.

CHARMIAN  E'en as the o'erflowing Nilus presageth
famine.

IRAS  Go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.

CHARMIAN  Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication,
I cannot scratch mine ear.--Prithee
tell her but a workaday fortune.

SOOTHSAYER  Your fortunes are alike.

IRAS  But how, but how? Give me particulars.

SOOTHSAYER  I have said.

IRAS  Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?

CHARMIAN  Well, if you were but an inch of fortune
better than I, where would you choose it?

IRAS  Not in my husband's nose.

CHARMIAN  Our worser thoughts heavens mend. Alexas--
come, his fortune, his fortune! O, let him marry a
woman that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech thee, and
let her die, too, and give him a worse, and let worse
follow worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing
to his grave, fiftyfold a cuckold. Good Isis, hear me
this prayer, though thou deny me a matter of more
weight, good Isis, I beseech thee!

IRAS  Amen, dear goddess, hear that prayer of the
people. For, as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome
man loose-wived, so it is a deadly sorrow to
behold a foul knave uncuckolded. Therefore, dear
Isis, keep decorum and fortune him accordingly.

CHARMIAN  Amen.

ALEXAS  Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a
cuckold, they would make themselves whores but
they'd do 't.

ENOBARBUS  Hush, here comes Antony.

CHARMIAN  Not he. The Queen.

[Enter Cleopatra.]


CLEOPATRA  Saw you my lord?

ENOBARBUS  No, lady.

CLEOPATRA  Was he not here?

CHARMIAN  No, madam.

CLEOPATRA
He was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden
A Roman thought hath struck him.--Enobarbus!

ENOBARBUS  Madam?

CLEOPATRA
Seek him and bring him hither.--Where's Alexas?

ALEXAS
Here at your service. My lord approaches.

[Enter Antony with a Messenger.]


CLEOPATRA
We will not look upon him. Go with us.
[All but Antony and the Messenger exit.]

MESSENGER
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.

ANTONY  Against my brother Lucius?

MESSENGER  Ay.
But soon that war had end, and the time's state
Made friends of them, jointing their force 'gainst
Caesar,
Whose better issue in the war from Italy
Upon the first encounter drave them.

ANTONY  Well, what worst?

MESSENGER
The nature of bad news infects the teller.

ANTONY
When it concerns the fool or coward. On.
Things that are past are done, with me. 'Tis thus:
Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death,
I hear him as he flattered.

MESSENGER  Labienus--
This is stiff news--hath with his Parthian force
Extended Asia: from Euphrates
His conquering banner shook, from Syria
To Lydia and to Ionia,
Whilst--

ANTONY  "Antony," thou wouldst say?

MESSENGER  O, my lord!

ANTONY
Speak to me home; mince not the general tongue.
Name Cleopatra as she is called in Rome;
Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase, and taunt my faults
With such full license as both truth and malice
Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds
When our quick winds lie still, and our ills told us
Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.

MESSENGER  At your noble pleasure.	[Messenger exits.]

[Enter another Messenger.]


ANTONY
From Sicyon how the news? Speak there.

SECOND MESSENGER
The man from Sicyon--

ANTONY  Is there such an one?

SECOND MESSENGER
He stays upon your will.

ANTONY  Let him appear.
[Second Messenger exits.]
These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,
Or lose myself in dotage.

[Enter another Messenger with a letter.]

What are you?

THIRD MESSENGER
Fulvia thy wife is dead.

ANTONY  Where died she?

THIRD MESSENGER  In Sicyon.
Her length of sickness, with what else more serious
Importeth thee to know, this bears.
[He hands Antony the letter.]

ANTONY  Forbear me.
[Third Messenger exits.]
There's a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it.
What our contempts doth often hurl from us,
We wish it ours again. The present pleasure,
By revolution lowering, does become
The opposite of itself. She's good, being gone.
The hand could pluck her back that shoved her on.
I must from this enchanting queen break off.
Ten thousand harms more than the ills I know
My idleness doth hatch.--How now, Enobarbus!

[Enter Enobarbus.]


ENOBARBUS  What's your pleasure, sir?

ANTONY  I must with haste from hence.

ENOBARBUS  Why then we kill all our women. We see
how mortal an unkindness is to them. If they suffer
our departure, death's the word.

ANTONY  I must be gone.

ENOBARBUS  Under a compelling occasion, let women
die. It were pity to cast them away for nothing,
though between them and a great cause, they
should be esteemed nothing. Cleopatra, catching
but the least noise of this, dies instantly. I have seen
her die twenty times upon far poorer moment. I do
think there is mettle in death which commits some
loving act upon her, she hath such a celerity in
dying.

ANTONY  She is cunning past man's thought.

ENOBARBUS  Alack, sir, no, her passions are made of
nothing but the finest part of pure love. We cannot
call her winds and waters sighs and tears; they are
greater storms and tempests than almanacs can
report. This cannot be cunning in her; if it be, she
makes a shower of rain as well as Jove.

ANTONY  Would I had never seen her!

ENOBARBUS  O, sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful
piece of work, which not to have been blest
withal would have discredited your travel.

ANTONY  Fulvia is dead.

ENOBARBUS  Sir?

ANTONY  Fulvia is dead.

ENOBARBUS  Fulvia?

ANTONY  Dead.

ENOBARBUS  Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice.
When it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a
man from him, it shows to man the tailors of the
Earth; comforting therein, that when old robes are
worn out, there are members to make new. If there
were no more women but Fulvia, then had you
indeed a cut, and the case to be lamented. This grief
is crowned with consolation; your old smock brings
forth a new petticoat, and indeed the tears live in an
onion that should water this sorrow.

ANTONY
The business she hath broached in the state
Cannot endure my absence.

ENOBARBUS  And the business you have broached here
cannot be without you, especially that of Cleopatra's,
which wholly depends on your abode.

ANTONY
No more light answers. Let our officers
Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
The cause of our expedience to the Queen
And get her leave to part. For not alone
The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches,
Do strongly speak to us, but the letters too
Of many our contriving friends in Rome
Petition us at home. Sextus Pompeius
Hath given the dare to Caesar and commands
The empire of the sea. Our slippery people,
Whose love is never linked to the deserver
Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
Pompey the Great and all his dignities
Upon his son, who--high in name and power,
Higher than both in blood and life--stands up
For the main soldier; whose quality, going on,
The sides o' th' world may danger. Much is
breeding
Which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life
And not a serpent's poison. Say our pleasure,
To such whose place is under us, requires
Our quick remove from hence.

ENOBARBUS  I shall do 't.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Alexas, and Iras.]


CLEOPATRA
Where is he?

CHARMIAN  I did not see him since.

CLEOPATRA, [to Alexas]
See where he is, who's with him, what he does.
I did not send you. If you find him sad,
Say I am dancing; if in mirth, report
That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.
[Alexas exits.]

CHARMIAN
Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,
You do not hold the method to enforce
The like from him.

CLEOPATRA  What should I do I do not?

CHARMIAN
In each thing give him way; cross him in nothing.

CLEOPATRA
Thou teachest like a fool: the way to lose him.

CHARMIAN
Tempt him not so too far. I wish, forbear.
In time we hate that which we often fear.

[Enter Antony.]

But here comes Antony.

CLEOPATRA  I am sick and sullen.

ANTONY
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose--

CLEOPATRA
Help me away, dear Charmian! I shall fall.
It cannot be thus long; the sides of nature
Will not sustain it.

ANTONY  Now, my dearest queen--

CLEOPATRA
Pray you stand farther from me.

ANTONY  What's the matter?

CLEOPATRA
I know by that same eye there's some good news.
What, says the married woman you may go?
Would she had never given you leave to come.
Let her not say 'tis I that keep you here.
I have no power upon you. Hers you are.

ANTONY
The gods best know--

CLEOPATRA  O, never was there queen
So mightily betrayed! Yet at the first
I saw the treasons planted.

ANTONY  Cleopatra--

CLEOPATRA
Why should I think you can be mine, and true--
Though you in swearing shake the throned gods--
Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows
Which break themselves in swearing!

ANTONY  Most sweet
queen--

CLEOPATRA
Nay, pray you seek no color for your going,
But bid farewell and go. When you sued staying,
Then was the time for words. No going then!
Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
Bliss in our brows' bent; none our parts so poor
But was a race of heaven. They are so still,
Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
Art turned the greatest liar.

ANTONY  How now, lady?

CLEOPATRA
I would I had thy inches. Thou shouldst know
There were a heart in Egypt.

ANTONY  Hear me, queen:
The strong necessity of time commands
Our services awhile, but my full heart
Remains in use with you. Our Italy
Shines o'er with civil swords; Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the port of Rome;
Equality of two domestic powers
Breed scrupulous faction; the hated grown to
strength
Are newly grown to love; the condemned Pompey,
Rich in his father's honor, creeps apace
Into the hearts of such as have not thrived
Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten;
And quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge
By any desperate change. My more particular,
And that which most with you should safe my going,
Is Fulvia's death.

CLEOPATRA
Though age from folly could not give me freedom,
It does from childishness. Can Fulvia die?

ANTONY  She's dead, my queen.	[He shows her papers.]
Look here, and at thy sovereign leisure read
The garboils she awaked; at the last, best,
See when and where she died.

CLEOPATRA  O, most false love!
Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
In Fulvia's death, how mine received shall be.

ANTONY
Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know
The purposes I bear, which are or cease
As you shall give th' advice. By the fire
That quickens Nilus' slime, I go from hence
Thy soldier, servant, making peace or war
As thou affects.

CLEOPATRA  Cut my lace, Charmian, come!
But let it be; I am quickly ill and well;
So Antony loves.

ANTONY  My precious queen, forbear,
And give true evidence to his love, which stands
An honorable trial.

CLEOPATRA  So Fulvia told me.
I prithee turn aside and weep for her,
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one scene
Of excellent dissembling, and let it look
Like perfect honor.

ANTONY  You'll heat my blood. No more!

CLEOPATRA
You can do better yet, but this is meetly.

ANTONY
Now by my sword--

CLEOPATRA  And target. Still he mends.
But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman does become
The carriage of his chafe.

ANTONY  I'll leave you, lady.

CLEOPATRA  Courteous lord, one word.
Sir, you and I must part, but that's not it;
Sir, you and I have loved, but there's not it;
That you know well. Something it is I would--
O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
And I am all forgotten.

ANTONY  But that your Royalty
Holds idleness your subject, I should take you
For idleness itself.

CLEOPATRA  'Tis sweating labor
To bear such idleness so near the heart
As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me,
Since my becomings kill me when they do not
Eye well to you. Your honor calls you hence;
Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly,
And all the gods go with you. Upon your sword
Sit laurel victory, and smooth success
Be strewed before your feet.

ANTONY  Let us go. Come.
Our separation so abides and flies
That thou, residing here, goes yet with me,
And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee.
Away!
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Octavius Caesar, reading a letter,
Lepidus, and their Train.]


CAESAR
You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caesar's natural vice to hate
Our great competitor. From Alexandria
This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
The lamps of night in revel, is not more manlike
Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy
More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or
Vouchsafed to think he had partners. You shall
find there
A man who is th' abstract of all faults
That all men follow.

LEPIDUS  I must not think there are
Evils enough to darken all his goodness.
His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven,
More fiery by night's blackness, hereditary
Rather than purchased, what he cannot change
Than what he chooses.

CAESAR
You are too indulgent. Let's grant it is not
Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy,
To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit
And keep the turn of tippling with a slave,
To reel the streets at noon and stand the buffet
With knaves that smells of sweat. Say this becomes
him--
As his composure must be rare indeed
Whom these things cannot blemish--yet must
Antony
No way excuse his foils when we do bear
So great weight in his lightness. If he filled
His vacancy with his voluptuousness,
Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones
Call on him for 't. But to confound such time
That drums him from his sport and speaks as loud
As his own state and ours, 'tis to be chid
As we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their present pleasure
And so rebel to judgment.

[Enter a Messenger.]


LEPIDUS  Here's more news.

MESSENGER
Thy biddings have been done, and every hour,
Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
How 'tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea,
And it appears he is beloved of those
That only have feared Caesar. To the ports
The discontents repair, and men's reports
Give him much wronged.

CAESAR  I should have known no less.
It hath been taught us from the primal state
That he which is was wished until he were,
And the ebbed man, ne'er loved till ne'er worth love,
Comes feared by being lacked. This common body,
Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide
To rot itself with motion.

[Enter a Second Messenger.]


SECOND MESSENGER  Caesar, I bring thee word
Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates,
Makes the sea serve them, which they ear and
wound
With keels of every kind. Many hot inroads
They make in Italy--the borders maritime
Lack blood to think on 't--and flush youth revolt.
No vessel can peep forth but 'tis as soon
Taken as seen, for Pompey's name strikes more
Than could his war resisted.

CAESAR  Antony,
Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once
Was beaten from Modena, where thou slew'st
Hirsius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel
Did famine follow, whom thou fought'st against,
Though daintily brought up, with patience more
Than savages could suffer. Thou didst drink
The stale of horses and the gilded puddle
Which beasts would cough at. Thy palate then did
deign
The roughest berry on the rudest hedge.
Yea, like the stag when snow the pasture sheets,
The barks of trees thou browsed. On the Alps
It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh
Which some did die to look on. And all this--
It wounds thine honor that I speak it now--
Was borne so like a soldier that thy cheek
So much as lanked not.

LEPIDUS  'Tis pity of him.

CAESAR  Let his shames quickly
Drive him to Rome. 'Tis time we twain
Did show ourselves i' th' field, and to that end
Assemble we immediate council. Pompey
Thrives in our idleness.

LEPIDUS  Tomorrow, Caesar,
I shall be furnished to inform you rightly
Both what by sea and land I can be able
To front this present time.

CAESAR  Till which encounter,
It is my business too. Farewell.

LEPIDUS
Farewell, my lord. What you shall know meantime
Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,
To let me be partaker.

CAESAR
Doubt not, sir. I knew it for my bond.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Mardian.]


CLEOPATRA  Charmian!

CHARMIAN  Madam?

CLEOPATRA  Ha, ha! Give me to drink mandragora.

CHARMIAN  Why, madam?

CLEOPATRA
That I might sleep out this great gap of time
My Antony is away.

CHARMIAN  You think of him too much.

CLEOPATRA
O, 'tis treason!

CHARMIAN  Madam, I trust not so.

CLEOPATRA
Thou, eunuch Mardian!

MARDIAN  What's your Highness' pleasure?

CLEOPATRA
Not now to hear thee sing. I take no pleasure
In aught an eunuch has. 'Tis well for thee
That, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts
May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?

MARDIAN  Yes, gracious madam.

CLEOPATRA  Indeed?

MARDIAN
Not in deed, madam, for I can do nothing
But what indeed is honest to be done.
Yet have I fierce affections, and think
What Venus did with Mars.

CLEOPATRA  O, Charmian,
Where think'st thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk? Or is he on his horse?
O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!
Do bravely, horse, for wot'st thou whom thou
mov'st?
The demi-Atlas of this Earth, the arm
And burgonet of men. He's speaking now,
Or murmuring "Where's my serpent of old Nile?"
For so he calls me. Now I feed myself
With most delicious poison. Think on me
That am with Phoebus' amorous pinches black,
And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou wast here above the ground, I was
A morsel for a monarch. And great Pompey
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow;
There would he anchor his aspect, and die
With looking on his life.

[Enter Alexas from Antony.]


ALEXAS  Sovereign of Egypt, hail!

CLEOPATRA
How much unlike art thou Mark Antony!
Yet coming from him, that great med'cine hath
With his tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?

ALEXAS  Last thing he did, dear queen,
He kissed--the last of many doubled kisses--
This orient pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.

CLEOPATRA
Mine ear must pluck it thence.

ALEXAS  "Good friend," quoth
he,
"Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
This treasure of an oyster; at whose foot,
To mend the petty present, I will piece
Her opulent throne with kingdoms. All the East,
Say thou, shall call her mistress." So he nodded
And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed,
Who neighed so high that what I would have spoke
Was beastly dumbed by him.

CLEOPATRA  What, was he sad, or merry?

ALEXAS
Like to the time o' th' year between th' extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.

CLEOPATRA
O, well-divided disposition!--Note him,
Note him, good Charmian, 'tis the man! But note
him:
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their looks by his; he was not merry,
Which seemed to tell them his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his joy; but between both.
O, heavenly mingle!--Be'st thou sad or merry,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So does it no man's else.--Met'st thou my posts?

ALEXAS
Ay, madam, twenty several messengers.
Why do you send so thick?

CLEOPATRA  Who's born that day
When I forget to send to Antony
Shall die a beggar.--Ink and paper, Charmian.--
Welcome, my good Alexas.--Did I, Charmian,
Ever love Caesar so?

CHARMIAN  O, that brave Caesar!

CLEOPATRA
Be choked with such another emphasis!
Say "the brave Antony."

CHARMIAN  The valiant Caesar!

CLEOPATRA
By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth
If thou with Caesar paragon again
My man of men.

CHARMIAN  By your most gracious pardon,
I sing but after you.

CLEOPATRA  My salad days,
When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,
To say as I said then. But come, away,
Get me ink and paper.
He shall have every day a several greeting,
Or I'll unpeople Egypt.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Pompey, Menecrates, and Menas,
in warlike manner.]


POMPEY
If the great gods be just, they shall assist
The deeds of justest men.

MENAS  Know, worthy Pompey,
That what they do delay they not deny.

POMPEY
Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
The thing we sue for.

MENAS  We, ignorant of ourselves,
Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers
Deny us for our good; so find we profit
By losing of our prayers.

POMPEY  I shall do well.
The people love me, and the sea is mine;
My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope
Says it will come to th' full. Mark Antony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where
He loses hearts. Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flattered; but he neither loves,
Nor either cares for him.

MENAS  Caesar and Lepidus
Are in the field. A mighty strength they carry.

POMPEY
Where have you this? 'Tis false.

MENAS  From Silvius, sir.

POMPEY
He dreams. I know they are in Rome together,
Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love,
Salt Cleopatra, soften thy wanned lip!
Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both;
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts;
Keep his brain fuming. Epicurean cooks
Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honor
Even till a Lethe'd dullness--

[Enter Varrius.]

How now, Varrius?

VARRIUS
This is most certain that I shall deliver:
Mark Antony is every hour in Rome
Expected. Since he went from Egypt 'tis
A space for farther travel.

POMPEY  I could have given less matter
A better ear.--Menas, I did not think
This amorous surfeiter would have donned his helm
For such a petty war. His soldiership
Is twice the other twain. But let us rear
The higher our opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
The ne'er lust-wearied Antony.

MENAS  I cannot hope
Caesar and Antony shall well greet together.
His wife that's dead did trespasses to Caesar;
His brother warred upon him, although I think
Not moved by Antony.

POMPEY  I know not, Menas,
How lesser enmities may give way to greater.
Were 't not that we stand up against them all,
'Twere pregnant they should square between
themselves,
For they have entertained cause enough
To draw their swords. But how the fear of us
May cement their divisions and bind up
The petty difference, we yet not know.
Be 't as our gods will have 't. It only stands
Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
Come, Menas.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Enobarbus and Lepidus.]


LEPIDUS
Good Enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed,
And shall become you well, to entreat your captain
To soft and gentle speech.

ENOBARBUS  I shall entreat him
To answer like himself. If Caesar move him,
Let Antony look over Caesar's head
And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
Were I the wearer of Antonio's beard,
I would not shave 't today.

LEPIDUS
'Tis not a time for private stomaching.

ENOBARBUS  Every time serves for the matter that is
then born in 't.

LEPIDUS
But small to greater matters must give way.

ENOBARBUS  Not if the small come first.

LEPIDUS
Your speech is passion; but pray you stir
No embers up. Here comes the noble Antony.

[Enter, at one door, Antony and Ventidius.]


ENOBARBUS  And yonder Caesar.

[Enter, at another door, Caesar,
Maecenas, and Agrippa.]


ANTONY, [to Ventidius]
If we compose well here, to Parthia.
Hark, Ventidius.	[They talk aside.]

CAESAR, [to Maecenas]
I do not know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa.

LEPIDUS, [to Caesar and Antony]  Noble friends,
That which combined us was most great, and let not
A leaner action rend us. What's amiss,
May it be gently heard. When we debate
Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
Murder in healing wounds. Then, noble partners,
The rather for I earnestly beseech,
Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
Nor curstness grow to th' matter.

ANTONY  'Tis spoken well.
Were we before our armies, and to fight,
I should do thus.	[Flourish.]

CAESAR  Welcome to Rome.

ANTONY  Thank you.

CAESAR  Sit.

ANTONY  Sit, sir.

CAESAR  Nay, then.	[They sit.]

ANTONY
I learn you take things ill which are not so,
Or, being, concern you not.

CAESAR  I must be laughed at
If or for nothing or a little, I
Should say myself offended, and with you
Chiefly i' th' world; more laughed at, that I should
Once name you derogately when to sound your
name
It not concerned me.

ANTONY
My being in Egypt, Caesar, what was 't to you?

CAESAR
No more than my residing here at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt. Yet if you there
Did practice on my state, your being in Egypt
Might be my question.

ANTONY  How intend you, practiced?

CAESAR
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent
By what did here befall me. Your wife and brother
Made wars upon me, and their contestation
Was theme for you; you were the word of war.

ANTONY
You do mistake your business. My brother never
Did urge me in his act. I did inquire it,
And have my learning from some true reports
That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather
Discredit my authority with yours,
And make the wars alike against my stomach,
Having alike your cause? Of this my letters
Before did satisfy you. If you'll patch a quarrel,
As matter whole you have to make it with,
It must not be with this.

CAESAR  You praise yourself
By laying defects of judgment to me; but
You patched up your excuses.

ANTONY  Not so, not so.
I know you could not lack--I am certain on 't--
Very necessity of this thought, that I,
Your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought,
Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars
Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit in such another.
The third o' th' world is yours, which with a snaffle
You may pace easy, but not such a wife.

ENOBARBUS  Would we had all such wives, that the men
might go to wars with the women!

ANTONY
So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar,
Made out of her impatience--which not wanted
Shrewdness of policy too--I grieving grant
Did you too much disquiet. For that you must
But say I could not help it.

CAESAR  I wrote to you
When rioting in Alexandria; you
Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
Did gibe my missive out of audience.

ANTONY  Sir,
He fell upon me ere admitted, then;
Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want
Of what I was i' th' morning. But next day
I told him of myself, which was as much
As to have asked him pardon. Let this fellow
Be nothing of our strife; if we contend,
Out of our question wipe him.

CAESAR  You have broken
The article of your oath, which you shall never
Have tongue to charge me with.

LEPIDUS  Soft, Caesar!

ANTONY  No, Lepidus, let him speak.
The honor is sacred which he talks on now,
Supposing that I lacked it.--But on, Caesar:
The article of my oath?

CAESAR
To lend me arms and aid when I required them,
The which you both denied.

ANTONY  Neglected, rather;
And then when poisoned hours had bound me up
From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may
I'll play the penitent to you. But mine honesty
Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power
Work without it. Truth is that Fulvia,
To have me out of Egypt, made wars here,
For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
So far ask pardon as befits mine honor
To stoop in such a case.

LEPIDUS  'Tis noble spoken.

MAECENAS
If it might please you to enforce no further
The griefs between you, to forget them quite
Were to remember that the present need
Speaks to atone you.

LEPIDUS  Worthily spoken, Maecenas.

ENOBARBUS  Or, if you borrow one another's love for
the instant, you may, when you hear no more words
of Pompey, return it again. You shall have time to
wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.

ANTONY
Thou art a soldier only. Speak no more.

ENOBARBUS  That truth should be silent I had almost
forgot.

ANTONY
You wrong this presence; therefore speak no more.

ENOBARBUS  Go to, then. Your considerate stone.

CAESAR
I do not much dislike the matter, but
The manner of his speech; for 't cannot be
We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
So diff'ring in their acts. Yet if I knew
What hoop should hold us staunch, from edge to
edge
O' th' world I would pursue it.

AGRIPPA  Give me leave, Caesar.

CAESAR  Speak, Agrippa.

AGRIPPA
Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,
Admired Octavia. Great Mark Antony
Is now a widower.

CAESAR  Say not so, Agrippa.
If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof
Were well deserved of rashness.

ANTONY
I am not married, Caesar. Let me hear
Agrippa further speak.

AGRIPPA
To hold you in perpetual amity,
To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an unslipping knot, take Antony
Octavia to his wife, whose beauty claims
No worse a husband than the best of men;
Whose virtue and whose general graces speak
That which none else can utter. By this marriage
All little jealousies, which now seem great,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing. Truths would be tales,
Where now half-tales be truths. Her love to both
Would each to other and all loves to both
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke,
For 'tis a studied, not a present thought,
By duty ruminated.

ANTONY  Will Caesar speak?

CAESAR
Not till he hears how Antony is touched
With what is spoke already.

ANTONY  What power is in Agrippa,
If I would say "Agrippa, be it so,"
To make this good?

CAESAR  The power of Caesar, and
His power unto Octavia.

ANTONY  May I never
To this good purpose, that so fairly shows,
Dream of impediment. Let me have thy hand.
Further this act of grace; and from this hour
The heart of brothers govern in our loves
And sway our great designs.

CAESAR  There's my hand.
[They clasp hands.]
A sister I bequeath you whom no brother
Did ever love so dearly. Let her live
To join our kingdoms and our hearts; and never
Fly off our loves again.

LEPIDUS  Happily, amen!

ANTONY
I did not think to draw my sword 'gainst Pompey,
For he hath laid strange courtesies and great
Of late upon me. I must thank him only,
Lest my remembrance suffer ill report;
At heel of that, defy him.

LEPIDUS  Time calls upon 's.
Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
Or else he seeks out us.

ANTONY  Where lies he?

CAESAR  About the Mount Misena.

ANTONY  What is his strength by land?

CAESAR  Great and increasing;
But by sea he is an absolute master.

ANTONY  So is the fame.
Would we had spoke together. Haste we for it.
Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we
The business we have talked of.

CAESAR  With most gladness,
And do invite you to my sister's view,
Whither straight I'll lead you.

ANTONY
Let us, Lepidus, not lack your company.

LEPIDUS
Noble Antony, not sickness should detain me.
[Flourish. All but Enobarbus, Agrippa, and
Maecenas exit.]

MAECENAS, [to Enobarbus]  Welcome from Egypt, sir.

ENOBARBUS  Half the heart of Caesar, worthy
Maecenas!--My honorable friend Agrippa!

AGRIPPA  Good Enobarbus!

MAECENAS  We have cause to be glad that matters are so
well digested. You stayed well by 't in Egypt.

ENOBARBUS  Ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance
and made the night light with drinking.

MAECENAS  Eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast,
and but twelve persons there. Is this true?

ENOBARBUS  This was but as a fly by an eagle. We had
much more monstrous matter of feast, which worthily
deserved noting.

MAECENAS  She's a most triumphant lady, if report be
square to her.

ENOBARBUS  When she first met Mark Antony, she
pursed up his heart upon the river of Cydnus.

AGRIPPA  There she appeared indeed, or my reporter
devised well for her.

ENOBARBUS  I will tell you.
The barge she sat in like a burnished throne
Burned on the water. The poop was beaten gold,
Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
The winds were lovesick with them. The oars were
silver,
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat to follow faster,
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggared all description: she did lie
In her pavilion--cloth-of-gold, of tissue--
O'erpicturing that Venus where we see
The fancy outwork nature. On each side her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
With divers-colored fans, whose wind did seem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.

AGRIPPA  O, rare for Antony!

ENOBARBUS
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
So many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the helm
A seeming mermaid steers. The silken tackle
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands
That yarely frame the office. From the barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
Her people out upon her; and Antony,
Enthroned i' th' market-place, did sit alone,
Whistling to th' air, which but for vacancy
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too
And made a gap in nature.

AGRIPPA  Rare Egyptian!

ENOBARBUS
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
Invited her to supper. She replied
It should be better he became her guest,
Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony,
Whom ne'er the word of "No" woman heard speak,
Being barbered ten times o'er, goes to the feast,
And for his ordinary pays his heart
For what his eyes eat only.

AGRIPPA  Royal wench!
She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed;
He ploughed her, and she cropped.

ENOBARBUS  I saw her once
Hop forty paces through the public street,
And having lost her breath, she spoke and panted,
That she did make defect perfection,
And breathless pour breath forth.

MAECENAS
Now Antony must leave her utterly.

ENOBARBUS  Never. He will not.
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety. Other women cloy
The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry
Where most she satisfies. For vilest things
Become themselves in her, that the holy priests
Bless her when she is riggish.

MAECENAS
If beauty, wisdom, modesty can settle
The heart of Antony, Octavia is
A blessed lottery to him.

AGRIPPA  Let us go.
Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
Whilst you abide here.

ENOBARBUS  Humbly, sir, I thank you.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Antony, Caesar; Octavia between them.]


ANTONY
The world and my great office will sometimes
Divide me from your bosom.

OCTAVIA  All which time
Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers
To them for you.

ANTONY, [to Caesar]  Goodnight, sir.--My Octavia,
Read not my blemishes in the world's report.
I have not kept my square, but that to come
Shall all be done by th' rule. Good night, dear
lady.--
Good night, sir.

CAESAR  Goodnight.	[Caesar and Octavia exit.]

[Enter Soothsayer.]


ANTONY
Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?

SOOTHSAYER  Would I had never come from thence,
nor you thither.

ANTONY  If you can, your reason?

SOOTHSAYER  I see it in my motion, have it not in my
tongue. But yet hie you to Egypt again.

ANTONY
Say to me, whose fortunes shall rise higher,
Caesar's or mine?

SOOTHSAYER  Caesar's.
Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side.
Thy daemon--that thy spirit which keeps thee--is
Noble, courageous, high, unmatchable,
Where Caesar's is not. But near him, thy angel
Becomes afeard, as being o'erpowered. Therefore
Make space enough between you.

ANTONY  Speak this no more.

SOOTHSAYER
To none but thee; no more but when to thee.
If thou dost play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to lose; and of that natural luck
He beats thee 'gainst the odds. Thy luster thickens
When he shines by. I say again, thy spirit
Is all afraid to govern thee near him;
But he away, 'tis noble.

ANTONY  Get thee gone.
Say to Ventidius I would speak with him.
[Soothsayer exits.]
He shall to Parthia. Be it art or hap,
He hath spoken true. The very dice obey him,
And in our sports my better cunning faints
Under his chance. If we draw lots, he speeds;
His cocks do win the battle still of mine
When it is all to naught, and his quails ever
Beat mine, inhooped, at odds. I will to Egypt.
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
I' th' East my pleasure lies.

[Enter Ventidius.]

O, come, Ventidius.
You must to Parthia; your commission's ready.
Follow me and receive 't.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Lepidus, Maecenas, and Agrippa.]


LEPIDUS
Trouble yourselves no further. Pray you hasten
Your generals after.

AGRIPPA  Sir, Mark Antony
Will e'en but kiss Octavia, and we'll follow.

LEPIDUS
Till I shall see you in your soldiers' dress,
Which will become you both, farewell.

MAECENAS  We shall,
As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount
Before you, Lepidus.

LEPIDUS  Your way is shorter;
My purposes do draw me much about.
You'll win two days upon me.

BOTH  Sir, good success.

LEPIDUS  Farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Alexas.]


CLEOPATRA
Give me some music--music, moody food
Of us that trade in love.

ALL  The music, ho!

[Enter Mardian the eunuch.]


CLEOPATRA
Let it alone. Let's to billiards. Come, Charmian.

CHARMIAN
My arm is sore. Best play with Mardian.

CLEOPATRA
As well a woman with an eunuch played
As with a woman.--Come, you'll play with me, sir?

MARDIAN  As well as I can, madam.

CLEOPATRA
And when good will is showed, though 't come too
short,
The actor may plead pardon. I'll none now.
Give me mine angle; we'll to th' river. There,
My music playing far off, I will betray
Tawny-finned fishes. My bended hook shall pierce
Their slimy jaws, and as I draw them up
I'll think them every one an Antony
And say "Aha! You're caught."

CHARMIAN  'Twas merry when
You wagered on your angling; when your diver
Did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he
With fervency drew up.

CLEOPATRA  That time?--O, times!--
I laughed him out of patience; and that night
I laughed him into patience; and next morn,
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,
Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst
I wore his sword Philippan.

[Enter a Messenger.]

O, from Italy!
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have been barren.

MESSENGER  Madam, madam--

CLEOPATRA
Antonio's dead! If thou say so, villain,
Thou kill'st thy mistress. But well and free,
If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here
My bluest veins to kiss, a hand that kings
Have lipped and trembled kissing.

MESSENGER  First, madam, he is well.

CLEOPATRA
Why, there's more gold. But sirrah, mark, we use
To say the dead are well. Bring it to that,
The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
Down thy ill-uttering throat.

MESSENGER  Good madam, hear me.

CLEOPATRA  Well, go to, I will.
But there's no goodness in thy face--if Antony
Be free and healthful, so tart a favor
To trumpet such good tidings! If not well,
Thou shouldst come like a Fury crowned with snakes,
Not like a formal man.

MESSENGER  Will 't please you hear me?

CLEOPATRA
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st
Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well,
Or friends with Caesar or not captive to him,
I'll set thee in a shower of gold and hail
Rich pearls upon thee.

MESSENGER  Madam, he's well.

CLEOPATRA  Well said.

MESSENGER
And friends with Caesar.

CLEOPATRA  Th' art an honest man.

MESSENGER
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.

CLEOPATRA
Make thee a fortune from me.

MESSENGER  But yet, madam--

CLEOPATRA
I do not like "But yet." It does allay
The good precedence. Fie upon "But yet."
"But yet" is as a jailer to bring forth
Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar,
In state of health, thou say'st, and, thou say'st, free.

MESSENGER
Free, madam, no. I made no such report.
He's bound unto Octavia.

CLEOPATRA  For what good turn?

MESSENGER
For the best turn i' th' bed.

CLEOPATRA  I am pale, Charmian.

MESSENGER
Madam, he's married to Octavia.

CLEOPATRA
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
[Strikes him down.]

MESSENGER  Good madam, patience!

CLEOPATRA  What say you?	[Strikes him.]
Hence, horrible villain, or I'll spurn thine eyes
Like balls before me! I'll unhair thy head!
[She hales him up and down.]
Thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in
brine,
Smarting in ling'ring pickle.

MESSENGER  Gracious madam,
I that do bring the news made not the match.

CLEOPATRA
Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee
And make thy fortunes proud. The blow thou hadst
Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage,
And I will boot thee with what gift beside
Thy modesty can beg.

MESSENGER  He's married, madam.

CLEOPATRA
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.	[Draw a knife.]

MESSENGER  Nay then, I'll run.
What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.
[He exits.]

CHARMIAN
Good madam, keep yourself within yourself.
The man is innocent.

CLEOPATRA
Some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt.
Melt Egypt into Nile, and kindly creatures
Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again.
Though I am mad, I will not bite him. Call!

CHARMIAN
He is afeard to come.

CLEOPATRA  I will not hurt him.
These hands do lack nobility that they strike
A meaner than myself, since I myself
Have given myself the cause.

[Enter the Messenger again.]

Come hither, sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good
To bring bad news. Give to a gracious message
An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell
Themselves when they be felt.

MESSENGER  I have done my duty.

CLEOPATRA  Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser than I do
If thou again say "yes."

MESSENGER  He's married, madam.

CLEOPATRA
The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still?

MESSENGER
Should I lie, madam?

CLEOPATRA  O, I would thou didst,
So half my Egypt were submerged and made
A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence.
Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me
Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?

MESSENGER
I crave your Highness' pardon.

CLEOPATRA  He is married?

MESSENGER
Take no offense that I would not offend you.
To punish me for what you make me do
Seems much unequal. He's married to Octavia.

CLEOPATRA
O, that his fault should make a knave of thee
That art not what th' art sure of! Get thee hence.
The merchandise which thou hast brought from
Rome
Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand,
And be undone by 'em!	[Messenger exits.]

CHARMIAN  Good your Highness,
patience.

CLEOPATRA
In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.

CHARMIAN  Many times, madam.

CLEOPATRA
I am paid for 't now. Lead me from hence;
I faint. O, Iras, Charmian! 'Tis no matter.--
Go to the fellow, good Alexas. Bid him
Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
Her inclination; let him not leave out
The color of her hair. Bring me word quickly.
[Alexas exits.]
Let him forever go--let him not, Charmian.
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other way 's a Mars. [(To Mardian.)] Bid you
Alexas
Bring me word how tall she is.--Pity me,
Charmian,
But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Flourish. Enter Pompey and Menas at one door,
with Drum and Trumpet; at another Caesar, Lepidus,
Antony, Enobarbus, Maecenas, and Agrippa,
with Soldiers marching.]


POMPEY
Your hostages I have, so have you mine,
And we shall talk before we fight.

CAESAR  Most meet
That first we come to words, and therefore have we
Our written purposes before us sent,
Which if thou hast considered, let us know
If 'twill tie up thy discontented sword
And carry back to Sicily much tall youth
That else must perish here.

POMPEY  To you all three,
The senators alone of this great world,
Chief factors for the gods: I do not know
Wherefore my father should revengers want,
Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar,
Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you laboring for him. What was 't
That moved pale Cassius to conspire? And what
Made the all-honored, honest, Roman Brutus,
With the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous
freedom,
To drench the Capitol, but that they would
Have one man but a man? And that is it
Hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden
The angered ocean foams, with which I meant
To scourge th' ingratitude that despiteful Rome
Cast on my noble father.

CAESAR  Take your time.

ANTONY
Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails.
We'll speak with thee at sea. At land thou know'st
How much we do o'ercount thee.

POMPEY  At land indeed
Thou dost o'ercount me of my father's house;
But since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
Remain in 't as thou mayst.

LEPIDUS  Be pleased to tell us--
For this is from the present--how you take
The offers we have sent you.

CAESAR  There's the point.

ANTONY
Which do not be entreated to, but weigh
What it is worth embraced.

CAESAR  And what may follow
To try a larger fortune.

POMPEY  You have made me offer
Of Sicily, Sardinia; and I must
Rid all the sea of pirates; then to send
Measures of wheat to Rome. This 'greed upon,
To part with unhacked edges and bear back
Our targes undinted.

ALL  That's our offer.

POMPEY  Know then
I came before you here a man prepared
To take this offer. But Mark Antony
Put me to some impatience.--Though I lose
The praise of it by telling, you must know
When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
Your mother came to Sicily and did find
Her welcome friendly.

ANTONY  I have heard it, Pompey,
And am well studied for a liberal thanks,
Which I do owe you.

POMPEY  Let me have your hand.
[They clasp hands.]
I did not think, sir, to have met you here.

ANTONY
The beds i' th' East are soft; and thanks to you,
That called me timelier than my purpose hither,
For I have gained by 't.

CAESAR, [to Pompey]  Since I saw you last,
There's a change upon you.

POMPEY  Well, I know not
What counts harsh Fortune casts upon my face,
But in my bosom shall she never come
To make my heart her vassal.

LEPIDUS  Well met here.

POMPEY
I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed.
I crave our composition may be written
And sealed between us.

CAESAR  That's the next to do.

POMPEY
We'll feast each other ere we part, and let's
Draw lots who shall begin.

ANTONY  That will I, Pompey.

POMPEY
No, Antony, take the lot. But, first or last,
Your fine Egyptian cookery shall have
The fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
Grew fat with feasting there.

ANTONY  You have heard much.

POMPEY  I have fair meanings, sir.

ANTONY  And fair words to them.

POMPEY  Then so much have I heard.
And I have heard Apollodorus carried--

ENOBARBUS
No more of that. He did so.

POMPEY  What, I pray you?

ENOBARBUS
A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.

POMPEY
I know thee now. How far'st thou, soldier?

ENOBARBUS  Well,
And well am like to do, for I perceive
Four feasts are toward.

POMPEY  Let me shake thy hand.
I never hated thee. I have seen thee fight
When I have envied thy behavior.

ENOBARBUS  Sir,
I never loved you much, but I ha' praised you
When you have well deserved ten times as much
As I have said you did.

POMPEY  Enjoy thy plainness;
It nothing ill becomes thee.--
Aboard my galley I invite you all.
Will you lead, lords?

ALL  Show 's the way, sir.

POMPEY  Come.
[They exit, except for Enobarbus and Menas.]

MENAS, [aside]  Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have
made this treaty.--You and I have known, sir.

ENOBARBUS  At sea, I think.

MENAS  We have, sir.

ENOBARBUS  You have done well by water.

MENAS  And you by land.

ENOBARBUS  I will praise any man that will praise me,
though it cannot be denied what I have done by
land.

MENAS  Nor what I have done by water.

ENOBARBUS  Yes, something you can deny for your own
safety: you have been a great thief by sea.

MENAS  And you by land.

ENOBARBUS  There I deny my land service. But give me
your hand, Menas. [They clasp hands.] If our eyes
had authority, here they might take two thieves
kissing.

MENAS  All men's faces are true, whatsome'er their
hands are.

ENOBARBUS  But there is never a fair woman has a true
face.

MENAS  No slander. They steal hearts.

ENOBARBUS  We came hither to fight with you.

MENAS  For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a
drinking. Pompey doth this day laugh away his
fortune.

ENOBARBUS  If he do, sure he cannot weep 't back
again.

MENAS  You've said, sir. We looked not for Mark Antony
here. Pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?

ENOBARBUS  Caesar's sister is called Octavia.

MENAS  True, sir. She was the wife of Caius Marcellus.

ENOBARBUS  But she is now the wife of Marcus
Antonius.

MENAS  Pray you, sir?

ENOBARBUS  'Tis true.

MENAS  Then is Caesar and he forever knit together.

ENOBARBUS  If I were bound to divine of this unity, I
would not prophesy so.

MENAS  I think the policy of that purpose made more in
the marriage than the love of the parties.

ENOBARBUS  I think so, too. But you shall find the band
that seems to tie their friendship together will be
the very strangler of their amity. Octavia is of a holy,
cold, and still conversation.

MENAS  Who would not have his wife so?

ENOBARBUS  Not he that himself is not so, which is
Mark Antony. He will to his Egyptian dish again.
Then shall the sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in
Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is the
strength of their amity shall prove the immediate
author of their variance. Antony will use his affection
where it is. He married but his occasion here.

MENAS  And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard?
I have a health for you.

ENOBARBUS  I shall take it, sir. We have used our throats
in Egypt.

MENAS  Come, let's away.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Music plays. Enter two or three Servants
with a banquet.]


FIRST SERVANT  Here they'll be, man. Some o' their
plants are ill-rooted already. The least wind i' th'
world will blow them down.

SECOND SERVANT  Lepidus is high-colored.

FIRST SERVANT  They have made him drink alms-drink.

SECOND SERVANT  As they pinch one another by the
disposition, he cries out "No more," reconciles
them to his entreaty and himself to th' drink.

FIRST SERVANT  But it raises the greater war between
him and his discretion.

SECOND SERVANT  Why, this it is to have a name in great
men's fellowship. I had as lief have a reed that will
do me no service as a partisan I could not heave.

FIRST SERVANT  To be called into a huge sphere, and not
to be seen to move in 't, are the holes where eyes
should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.

[A sennet sounded. Enter Caesar, Antony, Pompey,
Lepidus, Agrippa, Maecenas, Enobarbus, Menas, with
other Captains and a Boy.]


ANTONY
Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o' th' Nile
By certain scales i' th' Pyramid; they know
By th' height, the lowness, or the mean if dearth
Or foison follow. The higher Nilus swells,
The more it promises. As it ebbs, the seedsman
Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
And shortly comes to harvest.

LEPIDUS  You've strange serpents there?

ANTONY  Ay, Lepidus.

LEPIDUS  Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your
mud by the operation of your sun; so is your
crocodile.

ANTONY  They are so.

POMPEY
Sit, and some wine. A health to Lepidus!

LEPIDUS  I am not so well as I should be, but I'll ne'er
out.

ENOBARBUS, [aside]  Not till you have slept. I fear me
you'll be in till then.

LEPIDUS  Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies'
pyramises are very goodly things. Without contradiction
I have heard that.

MENAS, [aside to Pompey]
Pompey, a word.

POMPEY, [aside to Menas]  Say in mine ear what is 't.

MENAS [(whispers in 's ear)]
Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee, captain,
And hear me speak a word.

POMPEY, [aside to Menas]
Forbear me till anon.--This wine for Lepidus!

LEPIDUS  What manner o' thing is your crocodile?

ANTONY  It is shaped, sir, like itself, and it is as broad as
it hath breadth. It is just so high as it is, and moves
with it own organs. It lives by that which nourisheth
it, and the elements once out of it, it
transmigrates.

LEPIDUS  What color is it of?

ANTONY  Of it own color too.

LEPIDUS  'Tis a strange serpent.

ANTONY  'Tis so, and the tears of it are wet.

CAESAR, [aside to Antony]  Will this description satisfy
him?

ANTONY  With the health that Pompey gives him, else he
is a very epicure.

POMPEY, [aside to Menas]
Go hang, sir, hang! Tell me of that? Away!
Do as I bid you.--Where's this cup I called for?

MENAS, [aside to Pompey]
If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear me,
Rise from thy stool.

POMPEY  I think th' art mad!
[He rises, and they walk aside.]
The matter?

MENAS
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.

POMPEY
Thou hast served me with much faith. What's else
to say?--
Be jolly, lords.

ANTONY  These quicksands, Lepidus,
Keep off them, for you sink.

MENAS, [aside to Pompey]
Wilt thou be lord of all the world?

POMPEY  What sayst thou?

MENAS
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.

POMPEY  How should that be?

MENAS  But entertain it,
And though thou think me poor, I am the man
Will give thee all the world.

POMPEY  Hast thou drunk well?

MENAS
No, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
Thou art, if thou dar'st be, the earthly Jove.
Whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips
Is thine, if thou wilt ha 't.

POMPEY  Show me which way.

MENAS
These three world-sharers, these competitors,
Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the cable,
And when we are put off, fall to their throats.
All there is thine.

POMPEY  Ah, this thou shouldst have done
And not have spoke on 't! In me 'tis villainy;
In thee 't had been good service. Thou must know
'Tis not my profit that does lead mine honor;
Mine honor, it. Repent that e'er thy tongue
Hath so betrayed thine act. Being done unknown,
I should have found it afterwards well done,
But must condemn it now. Desist and drink.

MENAS, [aside]  For this
I'll never follow thy palled fortunes more.
Who seeks and will not take when once 'tis offered
Shall never find it more.

POMPEY  This health to Lepidus!

ANTONY, [to Servant]
Bear him ashore.--I'll pledge it for him, Pompey.

ENOBARBUS
Here's to thee, Menas.

MENAS  Enobarbus, welcome.

POMPEY  Fill till the cup be hid.

ENOBARBUS, [pointing to the Servant carrying Lepidus]
There's a strong fellow, Menas.

MENAS  Why?

ENOBARBUS  He bears
The third part of the world, man. Seest not?

MENAS
The third part, then, is drunk. Would it were all,
That it might go on wheels.

ENOBARBUS  Drink thou. Increase the reels.

MENAS  Come.

POMPEY
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.

ANTONY
It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho!
Here's to Caesar.

CAESAR  I could well forbear 't.
It's monstrous labor when I wash my brain
And it grows fouler.

ANTONY  Be a child o' th' time.

CAESAR  Possess it, I'll make answer.
But I had rather fast from all, four days,
Than drink so much in one.

ENOBARBUS, [to Antony]  Ha, my brave emperor,
Shall we dance now the Egyptian bacchanals
And celebrate our drink?

POMPEY  Let's ha 't, good soldier.

ANTONY  Come, let's all take hands
Till that the conquering wine hath steeped our
sense
In soft and delicate Lethe.

ENOBARBUS  All take hands.
Make battery to our ears with the loud music,
The while I'll place you; then the boy shall sing.
The holding every man shall beat as loud
As his strong sides can volley.

[Music plays. Enobarbus places them hand in hand.]

The Song.

BOY	Come, thou monarch of the vine,
	Plumpy Bacchus, with pink eyne.
	In thy vats our cares be drowned.
	With thy grapes our hairs be crowned.

ALL	Cup us till the world go round,
	   Cup us till the world go round.

CAESAR
What would you more?--Pompey, goodnight.--
Good brother,
Let me request you off. Our graver business
Frowns at this levity.--Gentle lords, let's part.
You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarb
Is weaker than the wine, and mine own tongue
Splits what it speaks. The wild disguise hath almost
Anticked us all. What needs more words?
Goodnight.
Good Antony, your hand.

POMPEY  I'll try you on the shore.

ANTONY  And shall, sir. Give 's your hand.

POMPEY
O, Antony, you have my father's house.
But what? We are friends! Come down into the boat.

ENOBARBUS
Take heed you fall not.
[All but Menas and Enobarbus exit.]
Menas, I'll not on shore.

MENAS
No, to my cabin. These drums, these trumpets,
flutes! What!
Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
To these great fellows. Sound and be hanged. Sound
out!	[Sound a flourish, with drums.]

ENOBARBUS  Hoo, says 'a! There's my cap!
[He throws his cap in the air.]

MENAS  Hoo! Noble captain, come.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Ventidius as it were in triumph, the dead body of
Pacorus borne before him; with Silius and Soldiers.]


VENTIDIUS
Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now
Pleased Fortune does of Marcus Crassus' death
Make me revenger. Bear the King's son's body
Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,
Pays this for Marcus Crassus.

SILIUS  Noble Ventidius,
Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm,
The fugitive Parthians follow. Spur through Media,
Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
The routed fly. So thy grand captain, Antony,
Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and
Put garlands on thy head.

VENTIDIUS  O, Silius, Silius,
I have done enough. A lower place, note well,
May make too great an act. For learn this, Silius:
Better to leave undone than by our deed
Acquire too high a fame when him we serve 's away.
Caesar and Antony have ever won
More in their officer than person. Sossius,
One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which he achieved by th' minute, lost his favor.
Who does i' th' wars more than his captain can
Becomes his captain's captain; and ambition,
The soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss
Than gain which darkens him.
I could do more to do Antonius good,
But 'twould offend him. And in his offense
Should my performance perish.

SILIUS  Thou hast, Ventidius, that
Without the which a soldier and his sword
Grants scarce distinction. Thou wilt write to
Antony?

VENTIDIUS
I'll humbly signify what in his name,
That magical word of war, we have effected;
How, with his banners and his well-paid ranks,
The ne'er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia
We have jaded out o' th' field.

SILIUS  Where is he now?

VENTIDIUS
He purposeth to Athens, whither, with what haste
The weight we must convey with 's will permit,
We shall appear before him.--On there, pass along!
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Agrippa at one door, Enobarbus at another.]


AGRIPPA  What, are the brothers parted?

ENOBARBUS
They have dispatched with Pompey; he is gone.
The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
To part from Rome. Caesar is sad, and Lepidus,
Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled
With the greensickness.

AGRIPPA  'Tis a noble Lepidus.

ENOBARBUS
A very fine one. O, how he loves Caesar!

AGRIPPA
Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!

ENOBARBUS
Caesar? Why, he's the Jupiter of men.

AGRIPPA
What's Antony? The god of Jupiter.

ENOBARBUS
Spake you of Caesar? How, the nonpareil!

AGRIPPA
O Antony, O thou Arabian bird!

ENOBARBUS
Would you praise Caesar, say "Caesar." Go no
further.

AGRIPPA
Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.

ENOBARBUS
But he loves Caesar best, yet he loves Antony.
Hoo, hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets,
cannot
Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number--hoo!--
His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,
Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.

AGRIPPA  Both he loves.

ENOBARBUS
They are his shards and he their beetle.
[Trumpet within.]
So,
This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.

AGRIPPA
Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.

[Enter Caesar, Antony, Lepidus, and Octavia.]


ANTONY  No further, sir.

CAESAR
You take from me a great part of myself.
Use me well in 't.--Sister, prove such a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest bond
Shall pass on thy approof.--Most noble Antony,
Let not the piece of virtue which is set
Betwixt us, as the cement of our love
To keep it builded, be the ram to batter
The fortress of it. For better might we
Have loved without this mean, if on both parts
This be not cherished.

ANTONY  Make me not offended
In your distrust.

CAESAR  I have said.

ANTONY  You shall not find,
Though you be therein curious, the least cause
For what you seem to fear. So the gods keep you,
And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends.
We will here part.

CAESAR
Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well.
The elements be kind to thee and make
Thy spirits all of comfort. Fare thee well.

OCTAVIA  My noble brother.	[She weeps.]

ANTONY
The April's in her eyes. It is love's spring,
And these the showers to bring it on.--Be cheerful.

OCTAVIA, [to Caesar]
Sir, look well to my husband's house, and--

CAESAR
What, Octavia?

OCTAVIA  I'll tell you in your ear.
[Caesar and Octavia walk aside.]

ANTONY
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her heart inform her tongue--the swan's-down
feather
That stands upon the swell at the full of tide
And neither way inclines.

ENOBARBUS, [aside to Agrippa]  Will Caesar weep?

AGRIPPA  He has a cloud in 's face.

ENOBARBUS
He were the worse for that were he a horse;
So is he being a man.

AGRIPPA  Why, Enobarbus,
When Antony found Julius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring. And he wept
When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.

ENOBARBUS
That year indeed he was troubled with a rheum.
What willingly he did confound he wailed,
Believe 't, till I wept too.

CAESAR, [coming forward with Octavia]  No, sweet Octavia,
You shall hear from me still. The time shall not
Outgo my thinking on you.

ANTONY  Come, sir, come,
I'll wrestle with you in my strength of love.
Look, here I have you, thus I let you go,
And give you to the gods.

CAESAR  Adieu, be happy.

LEPIDUS, [to Antony]
Let all the number of the stars give light
To thy fair way.

CAESAR  Farewell, farewell.	[Kisses Octavia.]

ANTONY  Farewell.
[Trumpets sound. They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Alexas.]


CLEOPATRA
Where is the fellow?

ALEXAS  Half afeard to come.

CLEOPATRA
Go to, go to.--Come hither, sir.

[Enter the Messenger as before.]


ALEXAS  Good Majesty,
Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you
But when you are well pleased.

CLEOPATRA  That Herod's head
I'll have! But how, when Antony is gone,
Through whom I might command it?--Come thou
near.

MESSENGER
Most gracious Majesty!

CLEOPATRA  Did'st thou behold Octavia?

MESSENGER
Ay, dread queen.

CLEOPATRA  Where?

MESSENGER  Madam, in Rome.
I looked her in the face and saw her led
Between her brother and Mark Antony.

CLEOPATRA
Is she as tall as me?

MESSENGER  She is not, madam.

CLEOPATRA
Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongued or low?

MESSENGER
Madam, I heard her speak. She is low-voiced.

CLEOPATRA
That's not so good. He cannot like her long.

CHARMIAN
Like her? O Isis, 'tis impossible!

CLEOPATRA
I think so, Charmian: dull of tongue, and
dwarfish!--
What majesty is in her gait? Remember,
If e'er thou looked'st on majesty.

MESSENGER  She creeps.
Her motion and her station are as one.
She shows a body rather than a life,
A statue than a breather.

CLEOPATRA  Is this certain?

MESSENGER
Or I have no observance.

CHARMIAN  Three in Egypt
Cannot make better note.

CLEOPATRA  He's very knowing.
I do perceive 't. There's nothing in her yet.
The fellow has good judgment.

CHARMIAN  Excellent.

CLEOPATRA, [to Messenger]  Guess at her years, I
prithee.

MESSENGER  Madam, she was a widow.

CLEOPATRA  Widow? Charmian, hark.

MESSENGER  And I do think she's thirty.

CLEOPATRA
Bear'st thou her face in mind? Is 't long or round?

MESSENGER  Round even to faultiness.

CLEOPATRA
For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
Her hair what color?

MESSENGER  Brown, madam, and her forehead
As low as she would wish it.

CLEOPATRA, [giving money]  There's gold for thee.
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill.
I will employ thee back again. I find thee
Most fit for business. Go, make thee ready.
Our letters are prepared.	[Messenger exits.]

CHARMIAN  A proper man.

CLEOPATRA
Indeed he is so. I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,
This creature's no such thing.

CHARMIAN  Nothing, madam.

CLEOPATRA
The man hath seen some majesty, and should know.

CHARMIAN
Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,
And serving you so long!

CLEOPATRA
I have one thing more to ask him yet, good
Charmian,
But 'tis no matter. Thou shalt bring him to me
Where I will write. All may be well enough.

CHARMIAN  I warrant you, madam.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Antony and Octavia.]


ANTONY
Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that--
That were excusable, that and thousands more
Of semblable import--but he hath waged
New wars 'gainst Pompey; made his will and read it
To public ear;
Spoke scantly of me; when perforce he could not
But pay me terms of honor, cold and sickly
He vented them, most narrow measure lent me;
When the best hint was given him, he not took 't,
Or did it from his teeth.

OCTAVIA  O, my good lord,
Believe not all, or if you must believe,
Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady,
If this division chance, ne'er stood between,
Praying for both parts.
The good gods will mock me presently
When I shall pray "O, bless my lord and husband!"
Undo that prayer by crying out as loud
"O, bless my brother!" Husband win, win brother
Prays and destroys the prayer; no midway
'Twixt these extremes at all.

ANTONY  Gentle Octavia,
Let your best love draw to that point which seeks
Best to preserve it. If I lose mine honor,
I lose myself; better I were not yours
Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested,
Yourself shall go between 's. The meantime, lady,
I'll raise the preparation of a war
Shall stain your brother. Make your soonest haste,
So your desires are yours.

OCTAVIA  Thanks to my lord.
The Jove of power make me, most weak, most weak,
Your reconciler. Wars 'twixt you twain would be
As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
Should solder up the rift.

ANTONY
When it appears to you where this begins,
Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults
Can never be so equal that your love
Can equally move with them. Provide your going;
Choose your own company, and command what cost
Your heart has mind to.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Enobarbus and Eros.]


ENOBARBUS  How now, friend Eros?

EROS  There's strange news come, sir.

ENOBARBUS  What, man?

EROS  Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon
Pompey.

ENOBARBUS  This is old. What is the success?

EROS  Caesar, having made use of him in the wars
'gainst Pompey, presently denied him rivality,
would not let him partake in the glory of the action;
and, not resting here, accuses him of letters he had
formerly wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal
seizes him. So the poor third is up, till death enlarge
his confine.

ENOBARBUS
Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more,
And throw between them all the food thou hast,
They'll grind the one the other. Where's Antony?

EROS
He's walking in the garden, thus, and spurns
The rush that lies before him; cries "Fool Lepidus!"
And threats the throat of that his officer
That murdered Pompey.

ENOBARBUS  Our great navy's rigged.

EROS
For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius:
My lord desires you presently. My news
I might have told hereafter.

ENOBARBUS  'Twill be naught,
But let it be. Bring me to Antony.

EROS  Come, sir.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Agrippa, Maecenas, and Caesar.]


CAESAR
Contemning Rome, he has done all this and more
In Alexandria. Here's the manner of 't:
I' th' marketplace, on a tribunal silvered,
Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold
Were publicly enthroned. At the feet sat
Caesarion, whom they call my father's son,
And all the unlawful issue that their lust
Since then hath made between them. Unto her
He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,
Absolute queen.

MAECENAS  This in the public eye?

CAESAR
I' th' common showplace where they exercise.
His sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings.
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia
He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assigned
Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia. She
In th' habiliments of the goddess Isis
That day appeared, and oft before gave audience,
As 'tis reported, so.

MAECENAS  Let Rome be thus informed.

AGRIPPA
Who, queasy with his insolence already,
Will their good thoughts call from him.

CAESAR
The people knows it and have now received
His accusations.

AGRIPPA  Who does he accuse?

CAESAR
Caesar, and that, having in Sicily
Sextus Pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him
His part o' th' isle. Then does he say he lent me
Some shipping, unrestored. Lastly, he frets
That Lepidus of the triumvirate
Should be deposed and, being, that we detain
All his revenue.

AGRIPPA  Sir, this should be answered.

CAESAR
'Tis done already, and the messenger gone.
I have told him Lepidus was grown too cruel,
That he his high authority abused
And did deserve his change. For what I have
conquered,
I grant him part; but then in his Armenia
And other of his conquered kingdoms I
Demand the like.

MAECENAS  He'll never yield to that.

CAESAR
Nor must not then be yielded to in this.

[Enter Octavia with her Train.]


OCTAVIA
Hail, Caesar, and my lord! Hail, most dear Caesar.

CAESAR
That ever I should call thee castaway!

OCTAVIA
You have not called me so, nor have you cause.

CAESAR
Why have you stol'n upon us thus? You come not
Like Caesar's sister. The wife of Antony
Should have an army for an usher and
The neighs of horse to tell of her approach
Long ere she did appear. The trees by th' way
Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,
Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust
Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,
Raised by your populous troops. But you are come
A market-maid to Rome, and have prevented
The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown,
Is often left unloved. We should have met you
By sea and land, supplying every stage
With an augmented greeting.

OCTAVIA  Good my lord,
To come thus was I not constrained, but did it
On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony,
Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted
My grieved ear withal, whereon I begged
His pardon for return.

CAESAR  Which soon he granted,
Being an abstract 'tween his lust and him.

OCTAVIA
Do not say so, my lord.

CAESAR  I have eyes upon him,
And his affairs come to me on the wind.
Where is he now?

OCTAVIA  My lord, in Athens.

CAESAR
No, my most wronged sister. Cleopatra
Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire
Up to a whore, who now are levying
The kings o' th' Earth for war. He hath assembled
Bocchus, the King of Libya; Archelaus
Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, King
Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas;
King Manchus of Arabia; King of Pont;
Herod of Jewry; Mithridates, King
Of Comagen; Polemon and Amyntas,
The Kings of Mede and Lycaonia,
With a more larger list of scepters.

OCTAVIA  Ay me, most wretched,
That have my heart parted betwixt two friends
That does afflict each other!

CAESAR  Welcome hither.
Your letters did withhold our breaking forth
Till we perceived both how you were wrong led
And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart.
Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
O'er your content these strong necessities,
But let determined things to destiny
Hold unbewailed their way. Welcome to Rome,
Nothing more dear to me. You are abused
Beyond the mark of thought, and the high gods,
To do you justice, makes his ministers
Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort,
And ever welcome to us.

AGRIPPA  Welcome, lady.

MAECENAS  Welcome, dear madam.
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you;
Only th' adulterous Antony, most large
In his abominations, turns you off
And gives his potent regiment to a trull
That noises it against us.

OCTAVIA, [to Caesar]  Is it so, sir?

CAESAR
Most certain. Sister, welcome. Pray you
Be ever known to patience. My dear'st sister!
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Cleopatra and Enobarbus.]


CLEOPATRA
I will be even with thee, doubt it not.

ENOBARBUS  But why, why, why?

CLEOPATRA
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars
And say'st it is not fit.

ENOBARBUS  Well, is it, is it?

CLEOPATRA
Is 't not denounced against us? Why should not we
Be there in person?

ENOBARBUS  Well, I could reply:
If we should serve with horse and mares together,
The horse were merely lost. The mares would bear
A soldier and his horse.

CLEOPATRA  What is 't you say?

ENOBARBUS
Your presence needs must puzzle Antony,
Take from his heart, take from his brain, from 's time
What should not then be spared. He is already
Traduced for levity, and 'tis said in Rome
That Photinus, an eunuch, and your maids
Manage this war.

CLEOPATRA  Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
That speak against us! A charge we bear i' th' war,
And as the president of my kingdom will
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it.
I will not stay behind.

[Enter Antony and Canidius.]


ENOBARBUS  Nay, I have done.
Here comes the Emperor.

ANTONY  Is it not strange, Canidius,
That from Tarentum and Brundusium
He could so quickly cut the Ionian Sea
And take in Toryne?--You have heard on 't, sweet?

CLEOPATRA
Celerity is never more admired
Than by the negligent.

ANTONY  A good rebuke,
Which might have well becomed the best of men,
To taunt at slackness.--Canidius, we will fight
With him by sea.

CLEOPATRA  By sea, what else?

CANIDIUS  Why will
My lord do so?

ANTONY  For that he dares us to 't.

ENOBARBUS
So hath my lord dared him to single fight.

CANIDIUS
Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia,
Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers,
Which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off,
And so should you.

ENOBARBUS  Your ships are not well manned,
Your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people
Engrossed by swift impress. In Caesar's fleet
Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought.
Their ships are yare, yours heavy. No disgrace
Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
Being prepared for land.

ANTONY  By sea, by sea.

ENOBARBUS
Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
The absolute soldiership you have by land,
Distract your army, which doth most consist
Of war-marked footmen, leave unexecuted
Your own renowned knowledge, quite forgo
The way which promises assurance, and
Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard
From firm security.

ANTONY  I'll fight at sea.

CLEOPATRA
I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.

ANTONY
Our overplus of shipping will we burn,
And with the rest full-manned, from th' head of
Actium
Beat th' approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
We then can do 't at land.

[Enter a Messenger.]

Thy business?

MESSENGER
The news is true, my lord; he is descried.
Caesar has taken Toryne.	[He exits.]

ANTONY
Can he be there in person? 'Tis impossible;
Strange that his power should be. Canidius,
Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land,
And our twelve thousand horse. We'll to our ship.--
Away, my Thetis.

[Enter a Soldier.]

How now, worthy soldier?

SOLDIER
O noble emperor, do not fight by sea!
Trust not to rotten planks. Do you misdoubt
This sword and these my wounds? Let th' Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a-ducking. We
Have used to conquer standing on the earth
And fighting foot to foot.

ANTONY  Well, well, away.
[Antony, Cleopatra, and Enobarbus exit.]

SOLDIER
By Hercules, I think I am i' th' right.

CANIDIUS
Soldier, thou art, but his whole action grows
Not in the power on 't. So our leader's led,
And we are women's men.

SOLDIER  You keep by land
The legions and the horse whole, do you not?

CANIDIUS
Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius,
Publicola, and Caelius are for sea,
But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesar's
Carries beyond belief.

SOLDIER  While he was yet in Rome,
His power went out in such distractions as
Beguiled all spies.

CANIDIUS  Who's his lieutenant, hear you?

SOLDIER
They say one Taurus.

CANIDIUS  Well I know the man.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  The Emperor calls Canidius.

CANIDIUS
With news the time's in labor, and throws forth
Each minute some.
[They exit.]

Scene 8
=======
[Enter Caesar with his army, and Taurus, marching.]


CAESAR  Taurus!

TAURUS  My lord?

CAESAR
Strike not by land, keep whole. Provoke not battle
Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed
The prescript of this scroll.	[Hands him a scroll.]
Our fortune lies
Upon this jump.
[They exit.]

Scene 9
=======
[Enter Antony and Enobarbus.]


ANTONY
Set we our squadrons on yond side o' th' hill
In eye of Caesar's battle, from which place
We may the number of the ships behold
And so proceed accordingly.
[They exit.]

Scene 10
========
[Canidius marcheth with his land army one way
over the stage, and Taurus the lieutenant of Caesar
the other way. After their going in is heard the
noise of a sea fight.]


[Alarum. Enter Enobarbus.]


ENOBARBUS
Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer.
Th' Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder.
To see 't mine eyes are blasted.

[Enter Scarus.]


SCARUS  Gods and goddesses,
All the whole synod of them!

ENOBARBUS  What's thy passion?

SCARUS
The greater cantle of the world is lost
With very ignorance. We have kissed away
Kingdoms and provinces.

ENOBARBUS  How appears the fight?

SCARUS
On our side, like the tokened pestilence,
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt,
Whom leprosy o'ertake, i' th' midst o' th' fight,
When vantage like a pair of twins appeared
Both as the same--or, rather, ours the elder--
The breeze upon her like a cow in June,
Hoists sails and flies.

ENOBARBUS  That I beheld.
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not
Endure a further view.

SCARUS  She once being loofed,
The noble ruin of her magic, Antony,
Claps on his sea-wing and, like a doting mallard,
Leaving the fight in height, flies after her.
I never saw an action of such shame.
Experience, manhood, honor ne'er before
Did violate so itself.

ENOBARBUS  Alack, alack.

[Enter Canidius.]


CANIDIUS
Our fortune on the sea is out of breath
And sinks most lamentably. Had our general
Been what he knew himself, it had gone well.
O, he has given example for our flight
Most grossly by his own.

ENOBARBUS
Ay, are you thereabouts? Why then goodnight
indeed.

CANIDIUS  Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.

SCARUS
'Tis easy to 't, and there I will attend
What further comes.	[He exits.]

CANIDIUS  To Caesar will I render
My legions and my horse. Six kings already
Show me the way of yielding.	[He exits.]

ENOBARBUS  I'll yet follow
The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason
Sits in the wind against me.
[He exits.]

Scene 11
========
[Enter Antony with Attendants.]


ANTONY
Hark, the land bids me tread no more upon 't.
It is ashamed to bear me. Friends, come hither.
I am so lated in the world that I
Have lost my way forever. I have a ship
Laden with gold. Take that, divide it. Fly,
And make your peace with Caesar.

ALL  Fly? Not we!

ANTONY
I have fled myself and have instructed cowards
To run and show their shoulders. Friends, begone.
I have myself resolved upon a course
Which has no need of you. Begone.
My treasure's in the harbor; take it. O,
I followed that I blush to look upon!
My very hairs do mutiny, for the white
Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them
For fear and doting. Friends, begone. You shall
Have letters from me to some friends that will
Sweep your way for you. Pray you look not sad,
Nor make replies of loathness. Take the hint
Which my despair proclaims. Let that be left
Which leaves itself. To the seaside straightway!
I will possess you of that ship and treasure.
Leave me, I pray, a little--pray you, now,
Nay, do so--for indeed I have lost command.
Therefore I pray you--I'll see you by and by.
[Attendants move aside. Antony sits down.]

[Enter Cleopatra led by Charmian, Iras, and Eros.]


EROS
Nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.

IRAS  Do, most dear queen.

CHARMIAN  Do! Why, what else?

CLEOPATRA  Let me sit down. O Juno!	[She sits down.]

ANTONY  No, no, no, no, no.

EROS  See you here, sir?

ANTONY  Oh fie, fie, fie!

CHARMIAN  Madam.

IRAS  Madam, O good empress!

EROS  Sir, sir--

ANTONY
Yes, my lord, yes. He at Philippi kept
His sword e'en like a dancer, while I struck
The lean and wrinkled Cassius, and 'twas I
That the mad Brutus ended. He alone
Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had
In the brave squares of war, yet now--no matter.

CLEOPATRA
Ah, stand by.

EROS  The Queen, my lord, the Queen.

IRAS
Go to him, madam; speak to him.
He's unqualitied with very shame.

CLEOPATRA, [rising]  Well, then, sustain me. O!

EROS
Most noble sir, arise. The Queen approaches.
Her head's declined, and death will seize her but
Your comfort makes the rescue.

ANTONY  I have offended reputation,
A most unnoble swerving.

EROS  Sir, the Queen.

ANTONY, [rising]
O, whither hast them led me, Egypt? See
How I convey my shame out of thine eyes,
By looking back what I have left behind
'Stroyed in dishonor.

CLEOPATRA  O, my lord, my lord,
Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought
You would have followed.

ANTONY  Egypt, thou knew'st too well
My heart was to thy rudder tied by th' strings,
And thou shouldst tow me after. O'er my spirit
Thy full supremacy thou knew'st, and that
Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
Command me.

CLEOPATRA  O, my pardon!

ANTONY  Now I must
To the young man send humble treaties, dodge
And palter in the shifts of lowness, who
With half the bulk o' th' world played as I pleased,
Making and marring fortunes. You did know
How much you were my conqueror, and that
My sword, made weak by my affection, would
Obey it on all cause.

CLEOPATRA  Pardon, pardon!

ANTONY
Fall not a tear, I say; one of them rates
All that is won and lost. Give me a kiss.	[They kiss.]
Even this repays me.--
We sent our schoolmaster. Is he come back?--
Love, I am full of lead.--Some wine
Within there, and our viands! Fortune knows
We scorn her most when most she offers blows.
[They exit.]

Scene 12
========
[Enter Caesar, Agrippa, Thidias, and
Dolabella, with others.]


CAESAR
Let him appear that's come from Antony.
Know you him?

DOLABELLA  Caesar, 'tis his schoolmaster--
An argument that he is plucked, when hither
He sends so poor a pinion of his wing,
Which had superfluous kings for messengers
Not many moons gone by.

[Enter Ambassador from Antony.]


CAESAR  Approach, and speak.

AMBASSADOR
Such as I am, I come from Antony.
I was of late as petty to his ends
As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf
To his grand sea.

CAESAR  Be 't so. Declare thine office.

AMBASSADOR
Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and
Requires to live in Egypt, which not granted,
He lessens his requests, and to thee sues
To let him breathe between the heavens and Earth,
A private man in Athens. This for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness,
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves
The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
Now hazarded to thy grace.

CAESAR  For Antony,
I have no ears to his request. The Queen
Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she
From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend,
Or take his life there. This if she perform,
She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.

AMBASSADOR
Fortune pursue thee!

CAESAR  Bring him through the bands.
[Ambassador exits, with Attendants.]
[To Thidias.] To try thy eloquence now 'tis time.
Dispatch.
From Antony win Cleopatra. Promise,
And in our name, what she requires; add more,
From thine invention, offers. Women are not
In their best fortunes strong, but want will perjure
The ne'er-touched vestal. Try thy cunning, Thidias.
Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we
Will answer as a law.

THIDIAS  Caesar, I go.

CAESAR
Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,
And what thou think'st his very action speaks
In every power that moves.

THIDIAS  Caesar, I shall.
[They exit.]

Scene 13
========
[Enter Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, and Iras.]


CLEOPATRA
What shall we do, Enobarbus?

ENOBARBUS  Think, and die.

CLEOPATRA
Is Antony or we in fault for this?

ENOBARBUS
Antony only, that would make his will
Lord of his reason. What though you fled
From that great face of war, whose several ranges
Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
The itch of his affection should not then
Have nicked his captainship, at such a point,
When half to half the world opposed, he being
The mered question. 'Twas a shame no less
Than was his loss, to course your flying flags
And leave his navy gazing.

CLEOPATRA  Prithee, peace.

[Enter the Ambassador with Antony.]


ANTONY  Is that his answer?

AMBASSADOR  Ay, my lord.

ANTONY
The Queen shall then have courtesy, so she
Will yield us up?

AMBASSADOR  He says so.

ANTONY  Let her know 't.--
To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
And he will fill thy wishes to the brim
With principalities.

CLEOPATRA  That head, my lord?

ANTONY, [to Ambassador]
To him again. Tell him he wears the rose
Of youth upon him, from which the world should
note
Something particular: his coin, ships, legions
May be a coward's, whose ministers would prevail
Under the service of a child as soon
As i' th' command of Caesar. I dare him therefore
To lay his gay caparisons apart
And answer me declined, sword against sword,
Ourselves alone. I'll write it. Follow me.
[Antony and Ambassador exit.]

ENOBARBUS, [aside]
Yes, like enough, high-battled Caesar will
Unstate his happiness and be staged to th' show
Against a sworder! I see men's judgments are
A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward
Do draw the inward quality after them
To suffer all alike. That he should dream,
Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued
His judgment too.

[Enter a Servant.]


SERVANT  A messenger from Caesar.

CLEOPATRA
What, no more ceremony? See, my women,
Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
That kneeled unto the buds.--Admit him, sir.
[Servant exits.]

ENOBARBUS, [aside]
Mine honesty and I begin to square.
The loyalty well held to fools does make
Our faith mere folly. Yet he that can endure
To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord
Does conquer him that did his master conquer,
And earns a place i' th' story.

[Enter Thidias.]


CLEOPATRA  Caesar's will?

THIDIAS
Hear it apart.

CLEOPATRA  None but friends. Say boldly.

THIDIAS
So haply are they friends to Antony.

ENOBARBUS
He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has,
Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master
Will leap to be his friend. For us, you know
Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar's.

THIDIAS  So.--
Thus then, thou most renowned: Caesar entreats
Not to consider in what case thou stand'st
Further than he is Caesar.

CLEOPATRA  Go on; right royal.

THIDIAS
He knows that you embrace not Antony
As you did love, but as you feared him.

CLEOPATRA  O!

THIDIAS
The scars upon your honor therefore he
Does pity as constrained blemishes,
Not as deserved.

CLEOPATRA  He is a god and knows
What is most right. Mine honor was not yielded,
But conquered merely.

ENOBARBUS, [aside]  To be sure of that,
I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
Thy dearest quit thee.	[Enobarbus exits.]

THIDIAS  Shall I say to Caesar
What you require of him? For he partly begs
To be desired to give. It much would please him
That of his fortunes you should make a staff
To lean upon. But it would warm his spirits
To hear from me you had left Antony
And put yourself under his shroud,
The universal landlord.

CLEOPATRA  What's your name?

THIDIAS
My name is Thidias.

CLEOPATRA  Most kind messenger,
Say to great Caesar this in deputation:
I kiss his conqu'ring hand. Tell him I am prompt
To lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel.
Tell him, from his all-obeying breath I hear
The doom of Egypt.

THIDIAS  'Tis your noblest course.
Wisdom and fortune combating together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay
My duty on your hand.
[She gives him her hand to kiss.]

CLEOPATRA  Your Caesar's father oft,
When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in,
Bestowed his lips on that unworthy place
As it rained kisses.

[Enter Antony and Enobarbus.]


ANTONY  Favors? By Jove that thunders!
What art thou, fellow?

THIDIAS  One that but performs
The bidding of the fullest man and worthiest
To have command obeyed.

ENOBARBUS  You will be whipped.

ANTONY, [calling for Servants]
Approach there!--Ah, you kite!--Now, gods and
devils,
Authority melts from me. Of late when I cried "Ho!"
Like boys unto a muss kings would start forth
And cry "Your will?" Have you no ears? I am
Antony yet.

[Enter Servants.]

Take hence this jack and whip him.

ENOBARBUS, [aside]
'Tis better playing with a lion's whelp
Than with an old one dying.

ANTONY  Moon and stars!
Whip him! Were 't twenty of the greatest tributaries
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
So saucy with the hand of she here--what's her
name
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows,
Till like a boy you see him cringe his face
And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.

THIDIAS
Mark Antony--

ANTONY  Tug him away. Being whipped,
Bring him again. This jack of Caesar's shall
Bear us an errand to him.
[Servants exit with Thidias.]
[To Cleopatra.] You were half blasted ere I knew you.
Ha!
Have I my pillow left unpressed in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawful race,
And by a gem of women, to be abused
By one that looks on feeders?

CLEOPATRA  Good my lord--

ANTONY  You have been a boggler ever.
But when we in our viciousness grow hard--
O, misery on 't!--the wise gods seel our eyes,
In our own filth drop our clear judgments, make us
Adore our errors, laugh at 's while we strut
To our confusion.

CLEOPATRA  O, is 't come to this?

ANTONY
I found you as a morsel cold upon
Dead Caesar's trencher; nay, you were a fragment
Of Gneius Pompey's, besides what hotter hours,
Unregistered in vulgar fame, you have
Luxuriously picked out. For I am sure,
Though you can guess what temperance should be,
You know not what it is.

CLEOPATRA  Wherefore is this?

ANTONY
To let a fellow that will take rewards
And say "God quit you!" be familiar with
My playfellow, your hand, this kingly seal
And plighter of high hearts! O, that I were
Upon the hill of Basan, to outroar
The horned herd! For I have savage cause,
And to proclaim it civilly were like
A haltered neck which does the hangman thank
For being yare about him.

[Enter a Servant with Thidias.]

Is he whipped?

SERVANT  Soundly, my lord.

ANTONY  Cried he? And begged he pardon?

SERVANT  He did ask favor.

ANTONY, [to Thidias]
If that thy father live, let him repent
Thou wast not made his daughter; and be thou sorry
To follow Caesar in his triumph, since
Thou hast been whipped for following him.
Henceforth
The white hand of a lady fever thee;
Shake thou to look on 't. Get thee back to Caesar.
Tell him thy entertainment. Look thou say
He makes me angry with him; for he seems
Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry,
And at this time most easy 'tis to do 't,
When my good stars that were my former guides
Have empty left their orbs and shot their fires
Into th' abysm of hell. If he mislike
My speech and what is done, tell him he has
Hipparchus, my enfranched bondman, whom
He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he shall like to quit me. Urge it thou.
Hence with thy stripes, begone!	[Thidias exits.]

CLEOPATRA  Have you done yet?

ANTONY
Alack, our terrene moon is now eclipsed,
And it portends alone the fall of Antony.

CLEOPATRA  I must stay his time.

ANTONY
To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
With one that ties his points?

CLEOPATRA  Not know me yet?

ANTONY
Coldhearted toward me?

CLEOPATRA  Ah, dear, if I be so,
From my cold heart let heaven engender hail
And poison it in the source, and the first stone
Drop in my neck; as it determines, so
Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite,
Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the discandying of this pelleted storm
Lie graveless till the flies and gnats of Nile
Have buried them for prey!

ANTONY  I am satisfied.
Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where
I will oppose his fate. Our force by land
Hath nobly held; our severed navy too
Have knit again, and fleet, threatening most sealike.
Where hast thou been, my heart? Dost thou hear,
lady?
If from the field I shall return once more
To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood.
I and my sword will earn our chronicle.
There's hope in 't yet.

CLEOPATRA  That's my brave lord!

ANTONY
I will be treble-sinewed, -hearted, -breathed,
And fight maliciously; for when mine hours
Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
Of me for jests. But now I'll set my teeth
And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
Let's have one other gaudy night. Call to me
All my sad captains. Fill our bowls once more.
Let's mock the midnight bell.

CLEOPATRA  It is my birthday.
I had thought t' have held it poor. But since my lord
Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.

ANTONY  We will yet do well.

CLEOPATRA
Call all his noble captains to my lord.

ANTONY
Do so; we'll speak to them, and tonight I'll force
The wine peep through their scars.--Come on, my
queen,
There's sap in 't yet. The next time I do fight
I'll make Death love me, for I will contend
Even with his pestilent scythe.
[All but Enobarbus exit.]

ENOBARBUS
Now he'll outstare the lightning. To be furious
Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still
A diminution in our captain's brain
Restores his heart. When valor preys on reason,
It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
Some way to leave him.
[He exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Caesar, Agrippa, and Maecenas, with his army,
Caesar reading a letter.]


CAESAR
He calls me "boy," and chides as he had power
To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger
He hath whipped with rods, dares me to personal
combat,
Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know
I have many other ways to die; meantime
Laugh at his challenge.

MAECENAS  Caesar must think,
When one so great begins to rage, he's hunted
Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
Make boot of his distraction. Never anger
Made good guard for itself.

CAESAR  Let our best heads
Know that tomorrow the last of many battles
We mean to fight. Within our files there are,
Of those that served Mark Antony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done,
And feast the army; we have store to do 't,
And they have earned the waste. Poor Antony.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Antony, Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, Iras,
with others.]


ANTONY
He will not fight with me, Domitius?

ENOBARBUS  No.

ANTONY  Why should he not?

ENOBARBUS
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.

ANTONY  Tomorrow, soldier,
By sea and land I'll fight. Or I will live
Or bathe my dying honor in the blood
Shall make it live again. Woo't thou fight well?

ENOBARBUS
I'll strike and cry "Take all."

ANTONY  Well said. Come on.
Call forth my household servants.

[Enter three or four Servitors.]

Let's tonight
Be bounteous at our meal.--Give me thy hand;
Thou hast been rightly honest.--So hast thou,--
Thou,--and thou,--and thou. You have served me
well,
And kings have been your fellows.

CLEOPATRA, [aside to Enobarbus]  What means this?

ENOBARBUS, [aside to Cleopatra]
'Tis one of those odd tricks which sorrow shoots
Out of the mind.

ANTONY, [to another Servitor]  And thou art honest too.
I wish I could be made so many men,
And all of you clapped up together in
An Antony, that I might do you service
So good as you have done.

ALL THE SERVITORS  The gods forbid!

ANTONY
Well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight.
Scant not my cups, and make as much of me
As when mine empire was your fellow too
And suffered my command.

CLEOPATRA, [aside to Enobarbus]  What does he mean?

ENOBARBUS, [aside to Cleopatra]
To make his followers weep.

ANTONY, [to the Servitors]  Tend me tonight;
May be it is the period of your duty.
Haply you shall not see me more, or if,
A mangled shadow. Perchance tomorrow
You'll serve another master. I look on you
As one that takes his leave. Mine honest friends,
I turn you not away, but, like a master
Married to your good service, stay till death.
Tend me tonight two hours--I ask no more--
And the gods yield you for 't!

ENOBARBUS  What mean you, sir,
To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep,
And I, an ass, am onion-eyed. For shame,
Transform us not to women.

ANTONY  Ho, ho, ho!
Now the witch take me if I meant it thus!
Grace grow where those drops fall! My hearty
friends,
You take me in too dolorous a sense,
For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you
To burn this night with torches. Know, my hearts,
I hope well of tomorrow, and will lead you
Where rather I'll expect victorious life
Than death and honor. Let's to supper, come,
And drown consideration.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter a company of Soldiers.]


FIRST SOLDIER
Brother, goodnight. Tomorrow is the day.

SECOND SOLDIER
It will determine one way. Fare you well.
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?

FIRST SOLDIER  Nothing. What news?

SECOND SOLDIER
Belike 'tis but a rumor. Goodnight to you.

FIRST SOLDIER  Well, sir, goodnight.

[They meet other Soldiers who are entering.]


SECOND SOLDIER  Soldiers, have careful watch.

THIRD SOLDIER  And you. Goodnight, goodnight.

[They place themselves in every corner of the stage.]



SECOND SOLDIER  Here we; and if tomorrow
Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
Our landmen will stand up.

FIRST SOLDIER  'Tis a brave army, and full of purpose.

[Music of the hautboys is under the stage.]



SECOND SOLDIER  Peace. What noise?

FIRST SOLDIER  List, list!

SECOND SOLDIER  Hark!

FIRST SOLDIER  Music i' th' air.

THIRD SOLDIER  Under the earth.

FOURTH SOLDIER  It signs well, does it not?

THIRD SOLDIER  No.

FIRST SOLDIER  Peace, I say. What should this mean?

SECOND SOLDIER
'Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony loved,
Now leaves him.

FIRST SOLDIER  Walk. Let's see if other watchmen
Do hear what we do.

SECOND SOLDIER  How now, masters?	[Speak together.]

ALL  How now? How now? Do you hear this?

FIRST SOLDIER  Ay. Is 't not strange?

THIRD SOLDIER  Do you hear, masters? Do you hear?

FIRST SOLDIER
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter.
Let's see how it will give off.

ALL  Content. 'Tis strange.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Antony and Cleopatra, with
Charmian, and others.]


ANTONY, [calling]
Eros! Mine armor, Eros!

CLEOPATRA  Sleep a little.

ANTONY
No, my chuck.--Eros, come, mine armor, Eros.

[Enter Eros, carrying armor.]

Come, good fellow, put thine iron on.
If fortune be not ours today, it is
Because we brave her. Come.

CLEOPATRA  Nay, I'll help too.
What's this for?

ANTONY  Ah, let be, let be! Thou art
The armorer of my heart. False, false. This, this!

CLEOPATRA
Sooth, la, I'll help. Thus it must be.

ANTONY  Well, well,
We shall thrive now.--Seest thou, my good fellow?
Go, put on thy defenses.

EROS  Briefly, sir.

CLEOPATRA
Is not this buckled well?

ANTONY  Rarely, rarely.
He that unbuckles this, till we do please
To daff 't for our repose, shall hear a storm.--
Thou fumblest, Eros, and my queen's a squire
More tight at this than thou. Dispatch.--O love,
That thou couldst see my wars today, and knew'st
The royal occupation, thou shouldst see
A workman in 't.

[Enter an armed Soldier.]

Good morrow to thee. Welcome.
Thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge.
To business that we love we rise betime
And go to 't with delight.

SOLDIER  A thousand, sir,
Early though 't be, have on their riveted trim
And at the port expect you.	[Shout. Trumpets flourish.]

[Enter Captains and Soldiers.]


CAPTAIN
The morn is fair. Good morrow, general.

ALL
Good morrow, general.

ANTONY  'Tis well blown, lads.
This morning, like the spirit of a youth
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so.--Come, give me that. This way.--Well said.--
Fare thee well, dame.	[He kisses her.]
Whate'er becomes of me,
This is a soldier's kiss. Rebukable
And worthy shameful check it were to stand
On more mechanic compliment. I'll leave thee
Now like a man of steel.--You that will fight,
Follow me close. I'll bring you to 't.--Adieu.
[Antony, Eros, Captains, and Soldiers exit.]

CHARMIAN
Please you retire to your chamber?

CLEOPATRA  Lead me.
He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might
Determine this great war in single fight,
Then Antony--but now--. Well, on.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Trumpets sound. Enter Antony and Eros, and a Soldier
who meets them.]


SOLDIER
The gods make this a happy day to Antony.

ANTONY
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed
To make me fight at land.

SOLDIER  Had'st thou done so,
The kings that have revolted and the soldier
That has this morning left thee would have still
Followed thy heels.

ANTONY  Who's gone this morning?

SOLDIER  Who?
One ever near thee. Call for Enobarbus,
He shall not hear thee, or from Caesar's camp
Say "I am none of thine."

ANTONY  What sayest thou?

SOLDIER  Sir,
He is with Caesar.

EROS  Sir, his chests and treasure
He has not with him.

ANTONY  Is he gone?

SOLDIER  Most certain.

ANTONY
Go, Eros, send his treasure after. Do it.
Detain no jot, I charge thee. Write to him--
I will subscribe--gentle adieus and greetings.
Say that I wish he never find more cause
To change a master. O, my fortunes have
Corrupted honest men. Dispatch.--Enobarbus!
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Flourish. Enter Agrippa, Caesar, with
Enobarbus and Dolabella.]


CAESAR
Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight.
Our will is Antony be took alive;
Make it so known.

AGRIPPA  Caesar, I shall.	[He exits.]

CAESAR
The time of universal peace is near.
Prove this a prosp'rous day, the three-nooked world
Shall bear the olive freely.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  Antony
Is come into the field.

CAESAR  Go charge Agrippa
Plant those that have revolted in the vant
That Antony may seem to spend his fury
Upon himself.	[All but Enobarbus exit.]

ENOBARBUS
Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on
Affairs of Antony, there did dissuade
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar
And leave his master Antony. For this pains,
Caesar hath hanged him. Canidius and the rest
That fell away have entertainment but
No honorable trust. I have done ill,
Of which I do accuse myself so sorely
That I will joy no more.

[Enter a Soldier of Caesar's.]


SOLDIER  Enobarbus, Antony
Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with
His bounty overplus. The messenger
Came on my guard, and at thy tent is now
Unloading of his mules.

ENOBARBUS  I give it you.

SOLDIER  Mock not, Enobarbus.
I tell you true. Best you safed the bringer
Out of the host. I must attend mine office
Or would have done 't myself. Your emperor
Continues still a Jove.	[He exits.]

ENOBARBUS
I am alone the villain of the Earth,
And feel I am so most. O Antony,
Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid
My better service, when my turpitude
Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my
heart.
If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean
Shall outstrike thought, but thought will do 't, I feel.
I fight against thee? No. I will go seek
Some ditch wherein to die; the foul'st best fits
My latter part of life.
[He exits.]

Scene 7
=======
[Alarum, Drums and Trumpets. Enter Agrippa,
with other of Caesar's soldiers.]


AGRIPPA
Retire! We have engaged ourselves too far.
Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.	[They exit.]

[Alarums. Enter Antony, and Scarus wounded.]


SCARUS
O my brave emperor, this is fought indeed!
Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
With clouts about their heads.

ANTONY  Thou bleed'st apace.

SCARUS
I had a wound here that was like a T,
But now 'tis made an H.	[Sound of retreat far off.]

ANTONY  They do retire.

SCARUS
We'll beat 'em into bench-holes. I have yet
Room for six scotches more.

[Enter Eros.]


EROS
They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves
For a fair victory.

SCARUS  Let us score their backs
And snatch 'em up as we take hares, behind.
'Tis sport to maul a runner.

ANTONY  I will reward thee
Once for thy sprightly comfort and tenfold
For thy good valor. Come thee on.

SCARUS  I'll halt after.
[They exit.]

Scene 8
=======
[Alarum. Enter Antony again in a march;
Scarus, with others.]


ANTONY
We have beat him to his camp. Run one before
And let the Queen know of our gests.
[A Soldier exits.]
Tomorrow
Before the sun shall see 's, we'll spill the blood
That has today escaped. I thank you all,
For doughty-handed are you, and have fought
Not as you served the cause, but as 't had been
Each man's like mine. You have shown all Hectors.
Enter the city. Clip your wives, your friends.
Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears
Wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss
The honored gashes whole.

[Enter Cleopatra.]

[To Scarus.] Give me thy hand.
To this great fairy I'll commend thy acts,
Make her thanks bless thee.--O, thou day o' th'
world,
Chain mine armed neck. Leap thou, attire and all,
Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing.

CLEOPATRA  Lord of lords!
O infinite virtue, com'st thou smiling from
The world's great snare uncaught?

ANTONY  Mine nightingale,
We have beat them to their beds. What, girl, though
gray
Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet
ha' we
A brain that nourishes our nerves and can
Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man.
Commend unto his lips thy favoring hand.--
Kiss it, my warrior.	[Scarus kisses her hand.]
He hath fought today
As if a god in hate of mankind had
Destroyed in such a shape.

CLEOPATRA, [to Scarus]  I'll give thee, friend,
An armor all of gold. It was a king's.

ANTONY
He has deserved it, were it carbuncled
Like holy Phoebus' car. Give me thy hand.
Through Alexandria make a jolly march.
Bear our hacked targets like the men that owe
them.
Had our great palace the capacity
To camp this host, we all would sup together
And drink carouses to the next day's fate,
Which promises royal peril.--Trumpeters,
With brazen din blast you the city's ear.
Make mingle with our rattling taborins,
That heaven and Earth may strike their sounds
together,
Applauding our approach.
[They exit.]

Scene 9
=======
[Enter a Sentry and his company. Enobarbus follows.]


SENTRY
If we be not relieved within this hour,
We must return to th' court of guard. The night
Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle
By th' second hour i' th' morn.

FIRST WATCH  This last day was a shrewd one to 's.

ENOBARBUS  O, bear me witness, night--

SECOND WATCH  What man is this?

FIRST WATCH  Stand close, and list him.

ENOBARBUS
Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
When men revolted shall upon record
Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent.

SENTRY  Enobarbus?

SECOND WATCH  Peace! Hark further.

ENOBARBUS
O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
The poisonous damp of night dispunge upon me,
That life, a very rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
Against the flint and hardness of my fault,
Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder
And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,
Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
Forgive me in thine own particular,
But let the world rank me in register
A master-leaver and a fugitive.
O Antony! O Antony!	[He dies.]

FIRST WATCH  Let's speak to him.

SENTRY  Let's hear him, for the things he speaks may
concern Caesar.

SECOND WATCH  Let's do so. But he sleeps.

SENTRY
Swoons rather, for so bad a prayer as his
Was never yet for sleep.

FIRST WATCH  Go we to him.

SECOND WATCH  Awake, sir, awake! Speak to us.

FIRST WATCH  Hear you, sir?

SENTRY
The hand of death hath raught him.	[Drums afar off.]
Hark, the drums
Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him
To th' court of guard; he is of note. Our hour
Is fully out.

SECOND WATCH  Come on then. He may recover yet.
[They exit, carrying Enobarbus' body.]

Scene 10
========
[Enter Antony and Scarus, with their army.]


ANTONY
Their preparation is today by sea;
We please them not by land.

SCARUS  For both, my lord.

ANTONY
I would they'd fight i' th' fire or i' th' air;
We'd fight there too. But this it is: our foot
Upon the hills adjoining to the city
Shall stay with us--order for sea is given;
They have put forth the haven--
Where their appointment we may best discover
And look on their endeavor.
[They exit.]

Scene 11
========
[Enter Caesar and his army.]


CAESAR
But being charged, we will be still by land--
Which, as I take 't, we shall, for his best force
Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,
And hold our best advantage.
[They exit.]

Scene 12
========
[Enter Antony and Scarus.]


ANTONY
Yet they are not joined. Where yond pine does stand,
I shall discover all. I'll bring thee word
Straight how 'tis like to go.	[He exits.]
[Alarum afar off, as at a sea fight.]

SCARUS  Swallows have built
In Cleopatra's sails their nests. The augurs
Say they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly
And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony
Is valiant and dejected, and by starts
His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear
Of what he has and has not.

[Enter Antony.]


ANTONY  All is lost!
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me.
My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder
They cast their caps up and carouse together
Like friends long lost. Triple-turned whore! 'Tis thou
Hast sold me to this novice, and my heart
Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly--
For when I am revenged upon my charm,
I have done all. Bid them all fly. Begone!
[Scarus exits.]
O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more.
Fortune and Antony part here; even here
Do we shake hands. All come to this? The hearts
That spanieled me at heels, to whom I gave
Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
On blossoming Caesar, and this pine is barked
That overtopped them all. Betrayed I am.
O, this false soul of Egypt! This grave charm,
Whose eye becked forth my wars and called them
home,
Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end,
Like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose
Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.--
What Eros, Eros!

[Enter Cleopatra.]

Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!

CLEOPATRA
Why is my lord enraged against his love?

ANTONY
Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving
And blemish Caesar's triumph. Let him take thee
And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians!
Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
Of all thy sex; most monster-like be shown
For poor'st diminutives, for dolts, and let
Patient Octavia plow thy visage up
With her prepared nails.	[Cleopatra exits.]
'Tis well th' art gone,
If it be well to live. But better 'twere
Thou fell'st into my fury, for one death
Might have prevented many.--Eros, ho!--
The shirt of Nessus is upon me. Teach me,
Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage.
Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o' th' moon,
And with those hands that grasped the heaviest
club
Subdue my worthiest self. The witch shall die.
To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I
fall
Under this plot. She dies for 't.--Eros, ho!
[He exits.]

Scene 13
========
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Mardian.]


CLEOPATRA
Help me, my women! O, he's more mad
Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly
Was never so embossed.

CHARMIAN  To th' monument!
There lock yourself and send him word you are
dead.
The soul and body rive not more in parting
Than greatness going off.

CLEOPATRA  To th' monument!--
Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself.
Say that the last I spoke was "Antony,"
And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my death.--To th'
monument!
[They exit.]

Scene 14
========
[Enter Antony and Eros.]


ANTONY
Eros, thou yet behold'st me?

EROS  Ay, noble lord.

ANTONY
Sometime we see a cloud that's dragonish,
A vapor sometime like a bear or lion,
A towered citadel, a pendent rock,
A forked mountain, or blue promontory
With trees upon 't that nod unto the world
And mock our eyes with air. Thou hast seen these
signs.
They are black vesper's pageants.

EROS  Ay, my lord.

ANTONY
That which is now a horse, even with a thought
The rack dislimns and makes it indistinct
As water is in water.

EROS  It does, my lord.

ANTONY
My good knave Eros, now thy captain is
Even such a body. Here I am Antony,
Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.
I made these wars for Egypt, and the Queen,
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine--
Which whilst it was mine had annexed unto 't
A million more, now lost--she, Eros, has
Packed cards with Caesar and false-played my glory
Unto an enemy's triumph.
Nay, weep not, gentle Eros. There is left us
Ourselves to end ourselves.

[Enter Mardian.]

O, thy vile lady!
She has robbed me of my sword.

MARDIAN  No, Antony,
My mistress loved thee and her fortunes mingled
With thine entirely.

ANTONY  Hence, saucy eunuch! Peace!
She hath betrayed me and shall die the death.

MARDIAN
Death of one person can be paid but once,
And that she has discharged. What thou wouldst do
Is done unto thy hand. The last she spake
Was "Antony, most noble Antony."
Then in the midst a tearing groan did break
The name of Antony; it was divided
Between her heart and lips. She rendered life
Thy name so buried in her.

ANTONY  Dead, then?

MARDIAN  Dead.

ANTONY
Unarm, Eros. The long day's task is done,
And we must sleep.--That thou depart'st hence safe
Does pay thy labor richly. Go.	[Mardian exits.]
Off, pluck off!
[Eros begins to remove Antony's armor.]
The sevenfold shield of Ajax cannot keep
The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides!
Heart, once be stronger than thy continent;
Crack thy frail case. Apace, Eros, apace!
No more a soldier. Bruised pieces, go.
You have been nobly borne.--From me awhile.
[Eros exits.]
I will o'ertake thee, Cleopatra, and
Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
All length is torture. Since the torch is out,
Lie down and stray no farther. Now all labor
Mars what it does; yea, very force entangles
Itself with strength. Seal, then, and all is done.--
Eros!--I come, my queen.--Eros!--Stay for me.
Where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand,
And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze.
Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops,
And all the haunt be ours.--Come, Eros, Eros!

[Enter Eros.]


EROS
What would my lord?

ANTONY  Since Cleopatra died
I have lived in such dishonor that the gods
Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword
Quartered the world and o'er green Neptune's back
With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack
The courage of a woman--less noble mind
Than she which, by her death, our Caesar tells
"I am conqueror of myself." Thou art sworn, Eros,
That when the exigent should come, which now
Is come indeed, when I should see behind me
Th' inevitable prosecution of
Disgrace and horror, that on my command
Thou then wouldst kill me. Do 't. The time is come.
Thou strik'st not me; 'tis Caesar thou defeat'st.
Put color in thy cheek.

EROS  The gods withhold me!
Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
Though enemy, lost aim and could not?

ANTONY  Eros,
Wouldst thou be windowed in great Rome and see
Thy master thus with pleached arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face subdued
To penetrative shame, whilst the wheeled seat
Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded
His baseness that ensued?

EROS  I would not see 't.

ANTONY
Come, then, for with a wound I must be cured.
Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn
Most useful for thy country.

EROS  O, sir, pardon me!

ANTONY
When I did make thee free, swor'st thou not then
To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once,
Or thy precedent services are all
But accidents unpurposed. Draw, and come.

EROS
Turn from me then that noble countenance
Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.

ANTONY  Lo thee!	[He turns away.]

EROS
My sword is drawn.

ANTONY  Then let it do at once
The thing why thou hast drawn it.

EROS  My dear master,
My captain, and my emperor, let me say,
Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.

ANTONY  'Tis said, man, and farewell.

EROS
Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now?

ANTONY  Now, Eros.

EROS
Why, there, then.	[Stabs himself.]
Thus I do escape the sorrow
Of Antony's death.	[Dies.]

ANTONY  Thrice nobler than myself,
Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what
I should and thou couldst not. My queen and Eros
Have by their brave instruction got upon me
A nobleness in record. But I will be
A bridegroom in my death and run into 't
As to a lover's bed. Come then, and, Eros,
Thy master dies thy scholar. To do thus
I learned of thee. [He stabs himself.] How, not dead?
Not dead?
The guard, ho! O, dispatch me!

[Enter a company of the Guard, one of them named
Dercetus.]


FIRST GUARD  What's the noise?

ANTONY
I have done my work ill, friends. O, make an end
Of what I have begun!

SECOND GUARD  The star is fall'n.

FIRST GUARD
And time is at his period.

ALL  Alas, and woe!

ANTONY  Let him that loves me strike me dead.

FIRST GUARD  Not I.

SECOND GUARD  Nor I.

THIRD GUARD  Nor anyone.
[All but Antony and Dercetus exit.]

DERCETUS
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
[He takes Antony's sword.]
This sword but shown to Caesar with this tidings
Shall enter me with him.

[Enter Diomedes.]


DIOMEDES  Where's Antony?

DERCETUS  There, Diomed, there.

DIOMEDES  Lives he? Wilt thou not answer, man?
[Dercetus exits.]

ANTONY
Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword, and give me
Sufficing strokes for death.

DIOMEDES  Most absolute lord,
My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.

ANTONY
When did she send thee?

DIOMEDES  Now, my lord.

ANTONY  Where is she?

DIOMEDES
Locked in her monument. She had a prophesying
fear
Of what hath come to pass. For when she saw--
Which never shall be found--you did suspect
She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage
Would not be purged, she sent you word she was
dead;
But fearing since how it might work, hath sent
Me to proclaim the truth, and I am come,
I dread, too late.

ANTONY
Too late, good Diomed. Call my guard, I prithee.

DIOMEDES
What ho! The Emperor's guard! The guard, what ho!
Come, your lord calls.

[Enter four or five of the Guard of Antony.]


ANTONY
Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides.
'Tis the last service that I shall command you.

FIRST GUARD
Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear
All your true followers out.

ALL  Most heavy day!

ANTONY
Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate
To grace it with your sorrows. Bid that welcome
Which comes to punish us, and we punish it,
Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up.
I have led you oft; carry me now, good friends,
And have my thanks for all.
[They exit bearing Antony and the body of Eros.]

Scene 15
========
[Enter Cleopatra and her maids aloft, with
Charmian and Iras.]


CLEOPATRA
O Charmian, I will never go from hence.

CHARMIAN
Be comforted, dear madam.

CLEOPATRA  No, I will not.
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise. Our size of sorrow,
Proportioned to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.

[Enter Diomedes below.]

How now? Is he dead?

DIOMEDES
His death's upon him, but not dead.
Look out o' th' other side your monument.
His guard have brought him thither.

[Enter Antony below, and the Guard bearing him.]


CLEOPATRA  O sun,
Burn the great sphere thou mov'st in. Darkling stand
The varying shore o' th' world! O Antony, Antony,
Antony! Help, Charmian! Help, Iras, help!
Help, friends below! Let's draw him hither.

ANTONY  Peace!
Not Caesar's valor hath o'erthrown Antony,
But Antony's hath triumphed on itself.

CLEOPATRA
So it should be that none but Antony
Should conquer Antony, but woe 'tis so!

ANTONY
I am dying, Egypt, dying. Only
I here importune death awhile until
Of many thousand kisses the poor last
I lay upon thy lips.

CLEOPATRA  I dare not, dear,
Dear my lord, pardon, I dare not,
Lest I be taken. Not th' imperious show
Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall
Be brooched with me; if knife, drugs, serpents have
Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe.
Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes
And still conclusion, shall acquire no honor
Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony.--
Help me, my women!--We must draw thee up.--
Assist, good friends.	[They begin lifting him.]

ANTONY  O, quick, or I am gone.

CLEOPATRA
Here's sport indeed. How heavy weighs my lord!
Our strength is all gone into heaviness;
That makes the weight. Had I great Juno's power,
The strong-winged Mercury should fetch thee up
And set thee by Jove's side. Yet come a little.
Wishers were ever fools. O, come, come, come!
[They heave Antony aloft to Cleopatra.]
And welcome, welcome! Die when thou hast lived;
Quicken with kissing. Had my lips that power,
Thus would I wear them out.	[She kisses him.]

ALL  A heavy sight!

ANTONY  I am dying, Egypt, dying.
Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.

CLEOPATRA
No, let me speak, and let me rail so high
That the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,
Provoked by my offense.

ANTONY  One word, sweet queen:
Of Caesar seek your honor with your safety--O!

CLEOPATRA
They do not go together.

ANTONY  Gentle, hear me.
None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.

CLEOPATRA
My resolution and my hands I'll trust,
None about Caesar.

ANTONY
The miserable change now at my end
Lament nor sorrow at, but please your thoughts
In feeding them with those my former fortunes
Wherein I lived the greatest prince o' th' world,
The noblest, and do now not basely die,
Not cowardly put off my helmet to
My countryman--a Roman by a Roman
Valiantly vanquished. Now my spirit is going;
I can no more.

CLEOPATRA  Noblest of men, woo't die?
Hast thou no care of me? Shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better than a sty? O see, my women,
The crown o' th' Earth doth melt.--My lord!
[Antony dies.]
O, withered is the garland of the war;
The soldier's pole is fall'n; young boys and girls
Are level now with men. The odds is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting moon.

CHARMIAN  O, quietness, lady!
[Cleopatra swoons.]

IRAS  She's dead, too, our sovereign.

CHARMIAN  Lady!

IRAS  Madam!

CHARMIAN  O madam, madam, madam!

IRAS  Royal Egypt! Empress!	[Cleopatra stirs.]

CHARMIAN  Peace, peace, Iras!

CLEOPATRA
No more but e'en a woman, and commanded
By such poor passion as the maid that milks
And does the meanest chares. It were for me
To throw my scepter at the injurious gods,
To tell them that this world did equal theirs
Till they had stolen our jewel. All's but naught.
Patience is sottish, and impatience does
Become a dog that's mad. Then is it sin
To rush into the secret house of death
Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
What, what, good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian?
My noble girls! Ah, women, women! Look,
Our lamp is spent; it's out. Good sirs, take heart.
We'll bury him; and then, what's brave, what's
noble,
Let's do 't after the high Roman fashion
And make death proud to take us. Come, away.
This case of that huge spirit now is cold.
Ah women, women! Come, we have no friend
But resolution and the briefest end.
[They exit, bearing off Antony's body.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Caesar with Agrippa, Dolabella, Maecenas,
Gallus, and Proculeius, his council of war.]


CAESAR, [aside to Dolabella]
Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield.
Being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks
The pauses that he makes.

DOLABELLA  Caesar, I shall.
[Dolabella exits.]

[Enter Dercetus with the sword of Antony.]


CAESAR
Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar'st
Appear thus to us?

DERCETUS  I am called Dercetus.
Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy
Best to be served. Whilst he stood up and spoke,
He was my master, and I wore my life
To spend upon his haters. If thou please
To take me to thee, as I was to him
I'll be to Caesar; if thou pleasest not,
I yield thee up my life.

CAESAR  What is 't thou say'st?

DERCETUS
I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.

CAESAR
The breaking of so great a thing should make
A greater crack. The round world
Should have shook lions into civil streets
And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony
Is not a single doom; in the name lay
A moiety of the world.

DERCETUS  He is dead, Caesar,
Not by a public minister of justice,
Nor by a hired knife, but that self hand
Which writ his honor in the acts it did
Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his sword.
I robbed his wound of it. Behold it stained
With his most noble blood.

CAESAR  Look you sad, friends?
The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings
To wash the eyes of kings.

AGRIPPA  And strange it is
That nature must compel us to lament
Our most persisted deeds.

MAECENAS  His taints and honors
Waged equal with him.

AGRIPPA  A rarer spirit never
Did steer humanity, but you gods will give us
Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touched.

MAECENAS
When such a spacious mirror's set before him,
He needs must see himself.

CAESAR  O Antony,
I have followed thee to this, but we do lance
Diseases in our bodies. I must perforce
Have shown to thee such a declining day
Or look on thine. We could not stall together
In the whole world. But yet let me lament
With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts
That thou my brother, my competitor
In top of all design, my mate in empire,
Friend and companion in the front of war,
The arm of mine own body, and the heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle--that our stars
Unreconciliable should divide
Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends--

[Enter an Egyptian.]

But I will tell you at some meeter season.
The business of this man looks out of him.
We'll hear him what he says.--Whence are you?

EGYPTIAN
A poor Egyptian yet, the Queen my mistress,
Confined in all she has, her monument,
Of thy intents desires instruction,
That she preparedly may frame herself
To th' way she's forced to.

CAESAR  Bid her have good heart.
She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,
How honorable and how kindly we
Determine for her. For Caesar cannot live
To be ungentle.

EGYPTIAN  So the gods preserve thee.	[He exits.]

CAESAR
Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say
We purpose her no shame. Give her what comforts
The quality of her passion shall require,
Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
She do defeat us, for her life in Rome
Would be eternal in our triumph. Go,
And with your speediest bring us what she says
And how you find of her.

PROCULEIUS  Caesar, I shall.
[Proculeius exits.]

CAESAR
Gallus, go you along.	[Gallus exits.]
Where's Dolabella,
To second Proculeius?

ALL  Dolabella!

CAESAR
Let him alone, for I remember now
How he's employed. He shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my tent, where you shall see
How hardly I was drawn into this war,
How calm and gentle I proceeded still
In all my writings. Go with me and see
What I can show in this.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, and Iras.]


CLEOPATRA
My desolation does begin to make
A better life. 'Tis paltry to be Caesar;
Not being Fortune, he's but Fortune's knave,
A minister of her will. And it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which shackles accidents and bolts up change,
Which sleeps and never palates more the dung,
The beggar's nurse, and Caesar's.

[Enter Proculeius.]


PROCULEIUS
Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt,
And bids thee study on what fair demands
Thou mean'st to have him grant thee.

CLEOPATRA  What's thy name?

PROCULEIUS
My name is Proculeius.

CLEOPATRA  Antony
Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but
I do not greatly care to be deceived
That have no use for trusting. If your master
Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him
That majesty, to keep decorum, must
No less beg than a kingdom. If he please
To give me conquered Egypt for my son,
He gives me so much of mine own as I
Will kneel to him with thanks.

PROCULEIUS  Be of good cheer.
You're fall'n into a princely hand; fear nothing.
Make your full reference freely to my lord,
Who is so full of grace that it flows over
On all that need. Let me report to him
Your sweet dependency, and you shall find
A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness
Where he for grace is kneeled to.

CLEOPATRA  Pray you tell him
I am his fortune's vassal and I send him
The greatness he has got. I hourly learn
A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly
Look him i' th' face.

PROCULEIUS  This I'll report, dear lady.
Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
Of him that caused it.

[Gallus and Soldiers enter and seize Cleopatra.]


GALLUS
You see how easily she may be surprised.
Guard her till Caesar come.

IRAS  Royal queen!

CHARMIAN
O, Cleopatra, thou art taken, queen!

CLEOPATRA, [drawing a dagger]
Quick, quick, good hands!

PROCULEIUS, [seizing the dagger]  Hold, worthy lady, hold!
Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this
Relieved, but not betrayed.

CLEOPATRA  What, of death, too,
That rids our dogs of languish?

PROCULEIUS  Cleopatra,
Do not abuse my master's bounty by
Th' undoing of yourself. Let the world see
His nobleness well acted, which your death
Will never let come forth.

CLEOPATRA  Where art thou, Death?
Come hither, come! Come, come, and take a queen
Worth many babes and beggars.

PROCULEIUS  O, temperance, lady!

CLEOPATRA
Sir, I will eat no meat; I'll not drink, sir.
If idle talk will once be necessary--
I'll not sleep neither. This mortal house I'll ruin,
Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I
Will not wait pinioned at your master's court,
Nor once be chastised with the sober eye
Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up
And show me to the shouting varletry
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
Be gentle grave unto me; rather on Nilus' mud
Lay me stark naked, and let the waterflies
Blow me into abhorring; rather make
My country's high pyramides my gibbet
And hang me up in chains!

PROCULEIUS  You do extend
These thoughts of horror further than you shall
Find cause in Caesar.

[Enter Dolabella.]


DOLABELLA  Proculeius,
What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows,
And he hath sent for thee. For the Queen,
I'll take her to my guard.

PROCULEIUS  So, Dolabella,
It shall content me best. Be gentle to her.
[To Cleopatra.] To Caesar I will speak what you
shall please,
If you'll employ me to him.

CLEOPATRA  Say I would die.
[Proculeius, Gallus, and Soldiers exit.]

DOLABELLA
Most noble empress, you have heard of me.

CLEOPATRA
I cannot tell.

DOLABELLA  Assuredly you know me.

CLEOPATRA
No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.
You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams;
Is 't not your trick?

DOLABELLA  I understand not, madam.

CLEOPATRA
I dreamt there was an emperor Antony.
O, such another sleep, that I might see
But such another man.

DOLABELLA  If it might please you--

CLEOPATRA
His face was as the heavens, and therein stuck
A sun and moon, which kept their course and
lighted
The little O, the Earth.

DOLABELLA  Most sovereign creature--

CLEOPATRA
His legs bestrid the ocean, his reared arm
Crested the world. His voice was propertied
As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends;
But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty,
There was no winter in 't; an autumn 'twas
That grew the more by reaping. His delights
Were dolphin-like; they showed his back above
The element they lived in. In his livery
Walked crowns and crownets; realms and islands
were
As plates dropped from his pocket.

DOLABELLA  Cleopatra--

CLEOPATRA
Think you there was, or might be, such a man
As this I dreamt of?

DOLABELLA  Gentle madam, no.

CLEOPATRA
You lie up to the hearing of the gods!
But if there be nor ever were one such,
It's past the size of dreaming. Nature wants stuff
To vie strange forms with fancy, yet t' imagine
An Antony were nature's piece 'gainst fancy,
Condemning shadows quite.

DOLABELLA  Hear me, good madam.
Your loss is as yourself, great; and you bear it
As answering to the weight. Would I might never
O'ertake pursued success but I do feel,
By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
My very heart at root.

CLEOPATRA  I thank you, sir.
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?

DOLABELLA
I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.

CLEOPATRA
Nay, pray you, sir.

DOLABELLA  Though he be honorable--

CLEOPATRA  He'll lead me, then, in triumph.

DOLABELLA  Madam, he will. I know 't.

[Flourish. Enter Caesar, Proculeius, Gallus, Maecenas,
and others of his train.]


ALL  Make way there! Caesar!

CAESAR  Which is the Queen of Egypt?

DOLABELLA  It is the Emperor, madam.
[Cleopatra kneels.]

CAESAR  Arise. You shall not kneel.
I pray you, rise. Rise, Egypt.

CLEOPATRA  Sir, the gods
Will have it thus. My master and my lord
I must obey.	[She stands.]

CAESAR  Take to you no hard thoughts.
The record of what injuries you did us,
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
As things but done by chance.

CLEOPATRA  Sole sir o' th' world,
I cannot project mine own cause so well
To make it clear, but do confess I have
Been laden with like frailties which before
Have often shamed our sex.

CAESAR  Cleopatra, know
We will extenuate rather than enforce.
If you apply yourself to our intents,
Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find
A benefit in this change; but if you seek
To lay on me a cruelty by taking
Antony's course, you shall bereave yourself
Of my good purposes, and put your children
To that destruction which I'll guard them from
If thereon you rely. I'll take my leave.

CLEOPATRA
And may through all the world. 'Tis yours, and we,
Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.
[She holds out a paper.]

CAESAR
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.

CLEOPATRA
This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels
I am possessed of. 'Tis exactly valued,
Not petty things admitted.--Where's Seleucus?

[Enter Seleucus.]


SELEUCUS  Here, madam.

CLEOPATRA
This is my treasurer. Let him speak, my lord,
Upon his peril, that I have reserved
To myself nothing.--Speak the truth, Seleucus.

SELEUCUS
Madam, I had rather seel my lips
Than to my peril speak that which is not.

CLEOPATRA  What have I kept back?

SELEUCUS
Enough to purchase what you have made known.

CAESAR
Nay, blush not, Cleopatra. I approve
Your wisdom in the deed.

CLEOPATRA  See, Caesar, O, behold
How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours,
And should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus does
Even make me wild.--O slave, of no more trust
Than love that's hired! What, goest thou back? Thou
shalt
Go back, I warrant thee! But I'll catch thine eyes
Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog!
O rarely base!

CAESAR  Good queen, let us entreat you--

CLEOPATRA
O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,
Doing the honor of thy lordliness
To one so meek, that mine own servant should
Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,
That I some lady trifles have reserved,
Immoment toys, things of such dignity
As we greet modern friends withal, and say
Some nobler token I have kept apart
For Livia and Octavia, to induce
Their mediation, must I be unfolded
With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me
Beneath the fall I have. [To Seleucus.] Prithee, go
hence,
Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
Through th' ashes of my chance. Wert thou a man,
Thou wouldst have mercy on me.

CAESAR  Forbear, Seleucus.
[Seleucus exits.]

CLEOPATRA
Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought
For things that others do; and when we fall,
We answer others' merits in our name--
Are therefore to be pitied.

CAESAR  Cleopatra,
Not what you have reserved nor what acknowledged
Put we i' th' roll of conquest. Still be 't yours!
Bestow it at your pleasure, and believe
Caesar's no merchant to make prize with you
Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be
cheered.
Make not your thoughts your prisons. No, dear
queen,
For we intend so to dispose you as
Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed and sleep.
Our care and pity is so much upon you
That we remain your friend. And so adieu.

CLEOPATRA
My master and my lord!

CAESAR  Not so. Adieu.
[Flourish. Caesar and his train exit.]

CLEOPATRA
He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
Be noble to myself. But hark thee, Charmian.
[She whispers to Charmian.]

IRAS
Finish, good lady. The bright day is done,
And we are for the dark.

CLEOPATRA, [to Charmian]  Hie thee again.
I have spoke already, and it is provided.
Go put it to the haste.

CHARMIAN  Madam, I will.

[Enter Dolabella.]


DOLABELLA
Where's the Queen?

CHARMIAN  Behold, sir.	[She exits.]

CLEOPATRA  Dolabella.

DOLABELLA
Madam, as thereto sworn by your command,
Which my love makes religion to obey,
I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
Intends his journey, and within three days
You with your children will he send before.
Make your best use of this. I have performed
Your pleasure and my promise.

CLEOPATRA  Dolabella,
I shall remain your debtor.

DOLABELLA  I your servant.
Adieu, good queen. I must attend on Caesar.

CLEOPATRA
Farewell, and thanks.	[He exits.]
Now, Iras, what think'st thou?
Thou an Egyptian puppet shall be shown
In Rome as well as I. Mechanic slaves
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers shall
Uplift us to the view. In their thick breaths,
Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclouded
And forced to drink their vapor.

IRAS  The gods forbid!

CLEOPATRA
Nay, 'tis most certain, Iras. Saucy lictors
Will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers
Ballad us out o' tune. The quick comedians
Extemporally will stage us and present
Our Alexandrian revels. Antony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness
I' th' posture of a whore.

IRAS  O the good gods!

CLEOPATRA  Nay, that's certain.

IRAS
I'll never see 't! For I am sure mine nails
Are stronger than mine eyes.

CLEOPATRA  Why, that's the way
To fool their preparation and to conquer
Their most absurd intents.

[Enter Charmian.]

Now, Charmian!
Show me, my women, like a queen. Go fetch
My best attires. I am again for Cydnus
To meet Mark Antony. Sirrah Iras, go.--
Now, noble Charmian, we'll dispatch indeed,
And when thou hast done this chare, I'll give thee
leave
To play till Doomsday.--Bring our crown and all.
[Iras exits. A noise within.]
Wherefore's this noise?

[Enter a Guardsman.]


GUARDSMAN  Here is a rural fellow
That will not be denied your Highness' presence.
He brings you figs.

CLEOPATRA
Let him come in.	[Guardsman exits.]
What poor an instrument
May do a noble deed! He brings me liberty.
My resolution's placed, and I have nothing
Of woman in me. Now from head to foot
I am marble-constant. Now the fleeting moon
No planet is of mine.

[Enter Guardsman and Countryman, with a basket.]


GUARDSMAN  This is the man.

CLEOPATRA  Avoid, and leave him.	[Guardsman exits.]
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there
That kills and pains not?

COUNTRYMAN  Truly I have him, but I would not be
the party that should desire you to touch him, for
his biting is immortal. Those that do die of it do
seldom or never recover.

CLEOPATRA  Remember'st thou any that have died on 't?

COUNTRYMAN  Very many, men and women too. I
heard of one of them no longer than yesterday--a
very honest woman, but something given to lie, as a
woman should not do but in the way of honesty--
how she died of the biting of it, what pain she felt.
Truly, she makes a very good report o' th' worm.
But he that will believe all that they say shall never
be saved by half that they do. But this is most
falliable, the worm's an odd worm.

CLEOPATRA  Get thee hence. Farewell.

COUNTRYMAN  I wish you all joy of the worm.
[He sets down the basket.]

CLEOPATRA  Farewell.

COUNTRYMAN  You must think this, look you, that the
worm will do his kind.

CLEOPATRA  Ay, ay, farewell.

COUNTRYMAN  Look you, the worm is not to be trusted
but in the keeping of wise people, for indeed there
is no goodness in the worm.

CLEOPATRA  Take thou no care; it shall be heeded.

COUNTRYMAN  Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you,
for it is not worth the feeding.

CLEOPATRA  Will it eat me?

COUNTRYMAN  You must not think I am so simple but
I know the devil himself will not eat a woman. I
know that a woman is a dish for the gods if the devil
dress her not. But truly these same whoreson devils
do the gods great harm in their women, for in every
ten that they make, the devils mar five.

CLEOPATRA  Well, get thee gone. Farewell.

COUNTRYMAN  Yes, forsooth. I wish you joy o' th'
worm.	[He exits.]

[Enter Iras bearing Cleopatra's royal regalia.]


CLEOPATRA
Give me my robe. Put on my crown. I have
Immortal longings in me. Now no more
The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip.
[Charmian and Iras begin to dress her.]
Yare, yare, good Iras, quick. Methinks I hear
Antony call. I see him rouse himself
To praise my noble act. I hear him mock
The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
To excuse their after wrath.--Husband, I come!
Now to that name my courage prove my title.
I am fire and air; my other elements
I give to baser life.--So, have you done?
Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
Farewell, kind Charmian.--Iras, long farewell.
[She kisses them. Iras falls and dies.]
Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
If thou and nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a lover's pinch,
Which hurts and is desired. Dost thou lie still?
If thus thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world
It is not worth leave-taking.

CHARMIAN
Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that I may say
The gods themselves do weep!

CLEOPATRA  This proves me base.
If she first meet the curled Antony,
He'll make demand of her, and spend that kiss
Which is my heaven to have.--Come, thou mortal
wretch,	[She places an asp on her breast.]
With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate
Of life at once untie. Poor venomous fool,
Be angry and dispatch. O, couldst thou speak,
That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
Unpolicied!

CHARMIAN  O eastern star!

CLEOPATRA  Peace, peace!
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,
That sucks the nurse asleep?

CHARMIAN  O, break! O, break!

CLEOPATRA
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle--
O Antony!--Nay, I will take thee too.
[She places an asp on her arm.]
What should I stay--	[Dies.]

CHARMIAN  In this wild world? So, fare thee well.
Now boast thee, Death, in thy possession lies
A lass unparalleled. Downy windows, close,
[She closes Cleopatra's eyes.]
And golden Phoebus, never be beheld
Of eyes again so royal. Your crown's awry.
I'll mend it, and then play--

[Enter the Guard rustling in.]


FIRST GUARD
Where's the Queen?

CHARMIAN  Speak softly. Wake her not.

FIRST GUARD
Caesar hath sent--

CHARMIAN  Too slow a messenger.
[She takes out an asp.]
O, come apace, dispatch! I partly feel thee.

FIRST GUARD
Approach, ho! All's not well. Caesar's beguiled.

SECOND GUARD
There's Dolabella sent from Caesar. Call him.
[A Guardsman exits.]

FIRST GUARD
What work is here, Charmian? Is this well done?

CHARMIAN
It is well done, and fitting for a princess
Descended of so many royal kings.
Ah, soldier!	[Charmian dies.]

[Enter Dolabella.]


DOLABELLA
How goes it here?

SECOND GUARD  All dead.

DOLABELLA  Caesar, thy thoughts
Touch their effects in this. Thyself art coming
To see performed the dreaded act which thou
So sought'st to hinder.

[Enter Caesar and all his train, marching.]


ALL  A way there, a way for Caesar!

DOLABELLA
O sir, you are too sure an augurer:
That you did fear is done.

CAESAR  Bravest at the last,
She leveled at our purposes and, being royal,
Took her own way. The manner of their deaths?
I do not see them bleed.

DOLABELLA  Who was last with them?

FIRST GUARD
A simple countryman that brought her figs.
This was his basket.

CAESAR  Poisoned, then.

FIRST GUARD  O Caesar,
This Charmian lived but now; she stood and spake.
I found her trimming up the diadem
On her dead mistress; tremblingly she stood,
And on the sudden dropped.

CAESAR  O, noble weakness!
If they had swallowed poison, 'twould appear
By external swelling; but she looks like sleep,
As she would catch another Antony
In her strong toil of grace.

DOLABELLA  Here on her breast
There is a vent of blood, and something blown.
The like is on her arm.

FIRST GUARD
This is an aspic's trail, and these fig leaves
Have slime upon them, such as th' aspic leaves
Upon the caves of Nile.

CAESAR  Most probable
That so she died, for her physician tells me
She hath pursued conclusions infinite
Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed,
And bear her women from the monument.
She shall be buried by her Antony.
No grave upon the earth shall clip in it
A pair so famous. High events as these
Strike those that make them; and their story is
No less in pity than his glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall
In solemn show attend this funeral,
And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see
High order in this great solemnity.
[They all exit, the Guards
bearing the dead bodies.]


All's Well That Ends Well
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/alls-well-that-ends-well/
Created on Mar 14, 2018, from FDT version 0.9.2.2

Characters in the Play
======================
HELEN, a gentlewoman of Rossillion
BERTRAM, Count of Rossillion
COUNTESS of Rossillion, Bertram's mother
In the Countess's household:
  STEWARD
  FOOL
  PAGE
PAROLLES, companion to Bertram
KING of France
LAFEW, a French lord
Later Captains in the army of the Duke of Florence:
  FIRST LORD
  SECOND LORD
Other LORDS in the court of the King of France
From the court of the King of France:
  FIRST GENTLEMAN
  SECOND GENTLEMAN
  GENTLEMAN, a "gentle Astringer"
FIRST SOLDIER, interpreter
The DUKE of Florence
A WIDOW of Florence
DIANA, the Widow's daughter
MARIANA, the Widow's neighbor
Attendants, Soldiers, Citizens of Florence, Servants


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter young Bertram Count of Rossillion, his mother
the Countess, and Helen, Lord Lafew, all in black.]


COUNTESS  In delivering my son from me, I bury a second
husband.

BERTRAM  And I in going, madam, weep o'er my
father's death anew; but I must attend his Majesty's
command, to whom I am now in ward, evermore
in subjection.

LAFEW  You shall find of the King a husband, madam;
you, sir, a father. He that so generally is at all times
good must of necessity hold his virtue to you,
whose worthiness would stir it up where it wanted
rather than lack it where there is such abundance.

COUNTESS  What hope is there of his Majesty's
amendment?

LAFEW  He hath abandoned his physicians, madam,
under whose practices he hath persecuted time
with hope, and finds no other advantage in the
process but only the losing of hope by time.

COUNTESS  This young gentlewoman had a father--O,
that "had," how sad a passage 'tis!--whose skill
was almost as great as his honesty; had it stretched
so far, would have made nature immortal, and
death should have play for lack of work. Would for
the King's sake he were living! I think it would be
the death of the King's disease.

LAFEW  How called you the man you speak of,
madam?

COUNTESS  He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it
was his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.

LAFEW  He was excellent indeed, madam. The King
very lately spoke of him admiringly, and mourningly.
He was skillful enough to have lived still, if
knowledge could be set up against mortality.

BERTRAM  What is it, my good lord, the King languishes
of?

LAFEW  A fistula, my lord.

BERTRAM  I heard not of it before.

LAFEW  I would it were not notorious.--Was this gentlewoman
the daughter of Gerard de Narbon?

COUNTESS  His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to
my overlooking. I have those hopes of her good
that her education promises. Her dispositions she
inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where an
unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there
commendations go with pity--they are virtues and
traitors too. In her they are the better for their simpleness.
She derives her honesty and achieves her
goodness.

LAFEW  Your commendations, madam, get from her
tears.

COUNTESS  'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her
praise in. The remembrance of her father never
approaches her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows
takes all livelihood from her cheek.--No
more of this, Helena. Go to. No more, lest it be
rather thought you affect a sorrow than to have--

HELEN  I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.

LAFEW  Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead,
excessive grief the enemy to the living.

COUNTESS  If the living be enemy to the grief, the
excess makes it soon mortal.

BERTRAM  Madam, I desire your holy wishes.

LAFEW  How understand we that?

COUNTESS
Be thou blessed, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners as in shape. Thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birthright. Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none. Be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
Under thy own life's key Be checked for silence,
But never taxed for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head. [To Lafew.] Farewell, my lord.
'Tis an unseasoned courtier. Good my lord,
Advise him.

LAFEW  He cannot want the best that shall
Attend his love.

COUNTESS  Heaven bless him.--Farewell, Bertram.

BERTRAM  The best wishes that can be forged in your
thoughts be servants to you.	[Countess exits.]
[To Helen.] Be comfortable to my mother, your
mistress, and make much of her.

LAFEW  Farewell, pretty lady. You must hold the credit
of your father. 	[Bertram and Lafew exit.]

HELEN
O, were that all! I think not on my father,
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him. My imagination
Carries no favor in 't but Bertram's.
I am undone. There is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star
And think to wed it, he is so above me.
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
Th' ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though a plague,
To see him every hour, to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls
In our heart's table--heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favor.
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his relics. Who comes here?

[Enter Parolles.]

One that goes with him. I love him for his sake,
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward.
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him
That they take place when virtue's steely bones
Looks bleak i' th' cold wind. Withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.

PAROLLES  Save you, fair queen.

HELEN  And you, monarch.

PAROLLES  No.

HELEN  And no.

PAROLLES  Are you meditating on virginity?

HELEN  Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you; let
me ask you a question. Man is enemy to virginity.
How may we barricado it against him?

PAROLLES  Keep him out.

HELEN  But he assails, and our virginity, though
valiant in the defense, yet is weak. Unfold to us
some warlike resistance.

PAROLLES  There is none. Man setting down before you
will undermine you and blow you up.

HELEN  Bless our poor virginity from underminers and
blowers-up! Is there no military policy how virgins
might blow up men?

PAROLLES  Virginity being blown down, man will
quicklier be blown up. Marry, in blowing him
down again, with the breach yourselves made you
lose your city. It is not politic in the commonwealth
of nature to preserve virginity. Loss of virginity
is rational increase, and there was never
virgin got till virginity was first lost. That you
were made of is metal to make virgins. Virginity by
being once lost may be ten times found; by being
ever kept, it is ever lost. 'Tis too cold a companion.
Away with 't.

HELEN  I will stand for 't a little, though therefore I
die a virgin.

PAROLLES  There's little can be said in 't. 'Tis against the
rule of nature. To speak on the part of virginity is
to accuse your mothers, which is most infallible
disobedience. He that hangs himself is a virgin;
virginity murders itself and should be buried in
highways out of all sanctified limit as a desperate
offendress against nature. Virginity breeds mites,
much like a cheese, consumes itself to the very
paring, and so dies with feeding his own stomach.
Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of
self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
canon. Keep it not; you cannot choose but lose by
't. Out with 't! Within ten year it will make itself
two, which is a goodly increase, and the principal
itself not much the worse. Away with 't!

HELEN  How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own
liking?

PAROLLES  Let me see. Marry, ill, to like him that ne'er
it likes. 'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with
lying; the longer kept, the less worth. Off with 't
while 'tis vendible; answer the time of request. Virginity,
like an old courtier, wears her cap out of
fashion, richly suited but unsuitable, just like the
brooch and the toothpick, which wear not now.
Your date is better in your pie and your porridge
than in your cheek. And your virginity, your old
virginity, is like one of our French withered pears:
it looks ill, it eats dryly; marry, 'tis a withered pear.
It was formerly better, marry, yet 'tis a withered
pear. Will you anything with it?

HELEN  Not my virginity, yet--
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
A mother, and a mistress, and a friend,
A phoenix, captain, and an enemy,
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
A counselor, a traitress, and a dear;
His humble ambition, proud humility,
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
His faith, his sweet disaster, with a world
Of pretty, fond adoptious christendoms
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he--
I know not what he shall. God send him well.
The court's a learning place, and he is one--

PAROLLES  What one, i' faith?

HELEN  That I wish well. 'Tis pity--

PAROLLES  What's pity?

HELEN
That wishing well had not a body in 't
Which might be felt, that we, the poorer born,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends
And show what we alone must think, which never
Returns us thanks.

[Enter Page.]


PAGE  Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.

PAROLLES  Little Helen, farewell. If I can remember
thee, I will think of thee at court.

HELEN  Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a
charitable star.

PAROLLES  Under Mars, I.

HELEN  I especially think under Mars.

PAROLLES  Why under Mars?

HELEN  The wars hath so kept you under that you
must needs be born under Mars.

PAROLLES  When he was predominant.

HELEN  When he was retrograde, I think rather.

PAROLLES  Why think you so?

HELEN  You go so much backward when you fight.

PAROLLES  That's for advantage.

HELEN  So is running away, when fear proposes the
safety. But the composition that your valor and
fear makes in you is a virtue of a good wing, and I
like the wear well.

PAROLLES  I am so full of businesses I cannot answer
thee acutely. I will return perfect courtier, in the
which my instruction shall serve to naturalize
thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's counsel
and understand what advice shall thrust upon
thee, else thou diest in thine unthankfulness, and
thine ignorance makes thee away. Farewell. When
thou hast leisure, say thy prayers; when thou hast
none, remember thy friends. Get thee a good husband,
and use him as he uses thee. So, farewell.
[Parolles and Page exit.]

HELEN
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie
Which we ascribe to heaven. The fated sky
Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose
What hath been cannot be. Who ever strove
To show her merit that did miss her love?
The King's disease--my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fixed and will not leave me.
[She exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish cornets. Enter the King of France with letters,
two Lords, and divers Attendants.]


KING
The Florentines and Senoys are by th' ears,
Have fought with equal fortune, and continue
A braving war.

FIRST LORD  So 'tis reported, sir.

KING
Nay, 'tis most credible. We here receive it
A certainty vouched from our cousin Austria,
With caution that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid, wherein our dearest friend
Prejudicates the business and would seem
To have us make denial.

FIRST LORD  His love and wisdom,
Approved so to your Majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.

KING  He hath armed our answer,
And Florence is denied before he comes.
Yet for our gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part.

SECOND LORD  It well may serve
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
For breathing and exploit.

[Enter Bertram, Lafew, and Parolles.]


KING  What's he comes here?

FIRST LORD
It is the Count Rossillion, my good lord,
Young Bertram.

KING  Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face.
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts
Mayst thou inherit too. Welcome to Paris.

BERTRAM
My thanks and duty are your Majesty's.

KING
I would I had that corporal soundness now
As when thy father and myself in friendship
First tried our soldiership. He did look far
Into the service of the time and was
Discipled of the bravest. He lasted long,
But on us both did haggish age steal on
And wore us out of act. It much repairs me
To talk of your good father. In his youth
He had the wit which I can well observe
Today in our young lords; but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honor.
So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awaked them, and his honor,
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak, and at this time
His tongue obeyed his hand. Who were below him
He used as creatures of another place
And bowed his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times,
Which, followed well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.

BERTRAM  His good remembrance, sir,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb.
So in approof lives not his epitaph
As in your royal speech.

KING
Would I were with him! He would always say--
Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words
He scattered not in ears, but grafted them
To grow there and to bear. "Let me not live"--
This his good melancholy oft began
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
When it was out--"Let me not live," quoth he,
"After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain, whose judgments are
Mere fathers of their garments, whose constancies
Expire before their fashions." This he wished.
I, after him, do after him wish too,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive
To give some laborers room.

SECOND LORD  You're loved, sir.
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.

KING
I fill a place, I know 't.--How long is 't, count,
Since the physician at your father's died?
He was much famed.

BERTRAM  Some six months since, my lord.

KING
If he were living, I would try him yet.--
Lend me an arm.--The rest have worn me out
With several applications. Nature and sickness
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, count.
My son's no dearer.

BERTRAM  Thank your Majesty.
[They exit. Flourish.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Countess, Steward, and Fool.]


COUNTESS  I will now hear. What say you of this
gentlewoman?

STEWARD  Madam, the care I have had to even your
content I wish might be found in the calendar of
my past endeavors, for then we wound our modesty
and make foul the clearness of our deservings
when of ourselves we publish them.

COUNTESS  What does this knave here? [To Fool.] Get
you gone, sirrah. The complaints I have heard of
you I do not all believe. 'Tis my slowness that I do
not, for I know you lack not folly to commit them
and have ability enough to make such knaveries
yours.

FOOL  'Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor
fellow.

COUNTESS  Well, sir.

FOOL  No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor,
though many of the rich are damned. But if I may
have your Ladyship's good will to go to the world,
Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.

COUNTESS  Wilt thou needs be a beggar?

FOOL  I do beg your good will in this case.

COUNTESS  In what case?

FOOL  In Isbel's case and mine own. Service is no heritage,
and I think I shall never have the blessing of
God till I have issue o' my body, for they say bairns
are blessings.

COUNTESS  Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.

FOOL  My poor body, madam, requires it. I am driven
on by the flesh, and he must needs go that the devil
drives.

COUNTESS  Is this all your Worship's reason?

FOOL  Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons, such
as they are.

COUNTESS  May the world know them?

FOOL  I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you
and all flesh and blood are, and indeed I do marry
that I may repent.

COUNTESS  Thy marriage sooner than thy wickedness.

FOOL  I am out o' friends, madam, and I hope to have
friends for my wife's sake.

COUNTESS  Such friends are thine enemies, knave.

FOOL  You're shallow, madam, in great friends, for the
knaves come to do that for me which I am aweary
of. He that ears my land spares my team and gives
me leave to in the crop; if I be his cuckold, he's my
drudge. He that comforts my wife is the cherisher
of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh
and blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves
my flesh and blood is my friend. Ergo, he that
kisses my wife is my friend. If men could be contented
to be what they are, there were no fear in
marriage, for young Charbon the Puritan and old
Poysam the Papist, howsome'er their hearts are
severed in religion, their heads are both one; they
may jowl horns together like any deer i' th' herd.

COUNTESS  Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and
calumnious knave?

FOOL  A prophet I, madam, and I speak the truth the
next way:
[Sings.]	For I the ballad will repeat
	   Which men full true shall find:
	Your marriage comes by destiny;
	   Your cuckoo sings by kind.

COUNTESS  Get you gone, sir. I'll talk with you more
anon.

STEWARD  May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen
come to you. Of her I am to speak.

COUNTESS  Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak
with her--Helen, I mean.

FOOL [sings]
	"Was this fair face the cause," quoth she,
	   "Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
	Fond done, done fond.
	   Was this King Priam's joy?"
	With that she sighed as she stood,
	With that she sighed as she stood,
	   And gave this sentence then:
	"Among nine bad if one be good,
	Among nine bad if one be good,
	   There's yet one good in ten."

COUNTESS  What, one good in ten? You corrupt the
song, sirrah.

FOOL  One good woman in ten, madam, which is a
purifying o' th' song. Would God would serve the
world so all the year! We'd find no fault with the
tithe-woman if I were the parson. One in ten,
quoth he? An we might have a good woman born
but or every blazing star or at an earthquake,
'twould mend the lottery well. A man may draw his
heart out ere he pluck one.

COUNTESS  You'll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command
you!

FOOL  That man should be at woman's command, and
yet no hurt done! Though honesty be no Puritan,
yet it will do no hurt; it will wear the surplice of
humility over the black gown of a big heart. I am
going, forsooth. The business is for Helen to come
hither.	[He exits.]

COUNTESS  Well, now.

STEWARD  I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman
entirely.

COUNTESS  Faith, I do. Her father bequeathed her to
me, and she herself, without other advantage, may
lawfully make title to as much love as she finds.
There is more owing her than is paid, and more
shall be paid her than she'll demand.

STEWARD  Madam, I was very late more near her than I
think she wished me. Alone she was and did communicate
to herself her own words to her own
ears; she thought, I dare vow for her, they touched
not any stranger sense. Her matter was she loved
your son. Fortune, she said, was no goddess, that
had put such difference betwixt their two estates;
Love no god, that would not extend his might only
where qualities were level; Dian no queen of virgins,
that would suffer her poor knight surprised
without rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward.
This she delivered in the most bitter touch
of sorrow that e'er I heard virgin exclaim in, which
I held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal,
sithence in the loss that may happen it concerns
you something to know it.

COUNTESS  You have discharged this honestly. Keep it
to yourself. Many likelihoods informed me of this
before, which hung so tott'ring in the balance that
I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you
leave me. Stall this in your bosom, and I thank you
for your honest care. I will speak with you further
anon.	[Steward exits.]

[Enter Helen.]

[Aside.]
Even so it was with me when I was young.
   If ever we are nature's, these are ours. This thorn
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong.
   Our blood to us, this to our blood is born.
It is the show and seal of nature's truth,
Where love's strong passion is impressed in youth.
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Her eye is sick on 't, I observe her now.

HELEN  What is your pleasure, madam?

COUNTESS
You know, Helen, I am a mother to you.

HELEN
Mine honorable mistress.

COUNTESS  Nay, a mother.
Why not a mother? When I said "a mother,"
Methought you saw a serpent. What's in "mother"
That you start at it? I say I am your mother
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine. 'Tis often seen
Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
A native slip to us from foreign seeds.
You ne'er oppressed me with a mother's groan,
Yet I express to you a mother's care.
God's mercy, maiden, does it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? What's the matter,
That this distempered messenger of wet,
The many-colored Iris, rounds thine eye?
Why? That you are my daughter?

HELEN  That I am not.

COUNTESS
I say I am your mother.

HELEN  Pardon, madam.
The Count Rossillion cannot be my brother.
I am from humble, he from honored name;
No note upon my parents, his all noble.
My master, my dear lord he is, and I
His servant live and will his vassal die.
He must not be my brother.

COUNTESS  Nor I your mother?

HELEN
You are my mother, madam. Would you were--
So that my lord your son were not my brother--
Indeed my mother! Or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister. Can 't no other
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?

COUNTESS
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law.
God shield you mean it not! "Daughter" and "mother"
So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?
My fear hath catched your fondness! Now I see
The mystery of your loneliness and find
Your salt tears' head. Now to all sense 'tis gross:
You love my son. Invention is ashamed
Against the proclamation of thy passion
To say thou dost not. Therefore tell me true,
But tell me then 'tis so, for, look, thy cheeks
Confess it th' one to th' other, and thine eyes
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors
That in their kind they speak it. Only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue
That truth should be suspected. Speak. Is 't so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
If it be not, forswear 't; howe'er, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
To tell me truly.

HELEN  Good madam, pardon me.

COUNTESS
Do you love my son?

HELEN  Your pardon, noble mistress.

COUNTESS
Love you my son?

HELEN  Do not you love him, madam?

COUNTESS
Go not about. My love hath in 't a bond
Whereof the world takes note. Come, come, disclose
The state of your affection, for your passions
Have to the full appeached.

HELEN, [kneeling]  Then I confess
Here on my knee before high heaven and you
That before you and next unto high heaven
I love your son.
My friends were poor but honest; so 's my love.
Be not offended, for it hurts not him
That he is loved of me. I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suit,
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him,
Yet never know how that desert should be.
I know I love in vain, strive against hope,
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to lose still. Thus, Indian-like,
Religious in mine error, I adore
The sun that looks upon his worshipper
But knows of him no more. My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love
For loving where you do; but if yourself,
Whose aged honor cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever in so true a flame of liking
Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and Love, O then give pity
To her whose state is such that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies.

COUNTESS
Had you not lately an intent--speak truly--
To go to Paris?

HELEN  Madam, I had.

COUNTESS  Wherefore?
Tell true.

HELEN, [standing]
I will tell truth, by grace itself I swear.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience had collected
For general sovereignty; and that he willed me
In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
More than they were in note. Amongst the rest
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The King is rendered lost.

COUNTESS
This was your motive for Paris, was it? Speak.

HELEN
My lord your son made me to think of this;
Else Paris, and the medicine, and the King
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
Haply been absent then.

COUNTESS  But think you, Helen,
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it? He and his physicians
Are of a mind: he that they cannot help him,
They that they cannot help. How shall they credit
A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools
Emboweled of their doctrine have left off
The danger to itself?

HELEN  There's something in 't
More than my father's skill, which was the great'st
Of his profession, that his good receipt
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By th' luckiest stars in heaven; and would your
Honor
But give me leave to try success, I'd venture
The well-lost life of mine on his Grace's cure
By such a day, an hour.

COUNTESS  Dost thou believe 't?

HELEN  Ay, madam, knowingly.

COUNTESS
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants, and my loving greetings
To those of mine in court. I'll stay at home
And pray God's blessing into thy attempt.
Be gone tomorrow, and be sure of this:
What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Flourish cornets. Enter the King, attended, with divers
young Lords, taking leave for the Florentine war;
Bertram Count Rossillion, and Parolles.]


KING
Farewell, young lords. These warlike principles
Do not throw from you.--And you, my lords,
farewell.
Share the advice betwixt you. If both gain all,
The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received
And is enough for both.

FIRST LORD  'Tis our hope, sir,
After well-entered soldiers, to return
And find your Grace in health.

KING
No, no, it cannot be. And yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords.
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen. Let higher Italy--
Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchy--see that you come
Not to woo honor but to wed it. When
The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud. I say farewell.

FIRST LORD
Health at your bidding serve your Majesty!

KING
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them.
They say our French lack language to deny
If they demand. Beware of being captives
Before you serve.

LORDS  Our hearts receive your warnings.

KING  Farewell.--Come hither to me.
[The King speaks to Attendants, while Bertram,
Parolles, and other Lords come forward.]

FIRST LORD, [to Bertram]
O my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!

PAROLLES
'Tis not his fault, the spark.

SECOND LORD  O, 'tis brave wars.

PAROLLES
Most admirable. I have seen those wars.

BERTRAM
I am commanded here and kept a coil
With "Too young," and "The next year," and "'Tis
too early."

PAROLLES
An thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.

BERTRAM
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry
Till honor be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with. By heaven, I'll steal away!

FIRST LORD
There's honor in the theft.

PAROLLES  Commit it, count.

SECOND LORD
I am your accessory. And so, farewell.

BERTRAM  I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured
body.

FIRST LORD  Farewell, captain.

SECOND LORD  Sweet Monsieur Parolles.

PAROLLES  Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin.
Good sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals.
You shall find in the regiment of the Spinii one
Captain Spurio with his cicatrice, an emblem of
war, here on his sinister cheek. It was this very
sword entrenched it. Say to him I live, and observe
his reports for me.

FIRST LORD  We shall, noble captain.

PAROLLES  Mars dote on you for his novices.
[Lords exit.]
[To Bertram.] What will you do?

BERTRAM  Stay the King.

PAROLLES  Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble
lords. You have restrained yourself within the list
of too cold an adieu. Be more expressive to them,
for they wear themselves in the cap of the time;
there do muster true gait; eat, speak, and move
under the influence of the most received star, and,
though the devil lead the measure, such are to be
followed. After them, and take a more dilated
farewell.

BERTRAM  And I will do so.

PAROLLES  Worthy fellows, and like to prove most
sinewy swordmen.	[Bertram and Parolles exit.]

[Enter Lafew, to the King.]


LAFEW, [kneeling]
Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.

KING  I'll fee thee to stand up.

LAFEW, [standing]
Then here's a man stands that has brought his
pardon.
I would you had kneeled, my lord, to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.

KING
I would I had, so I had broke thy pate
And asked thee mercy for 't.

LAFEW  Good faith, across.
But, my good lord, 'tis thus: will you be cured
Of your infirmity?

KING  No.

LAFEW  O, will you eat
No grapes, my royal fox? Yes, but you will
My noble grapes, an if my royal fox
Could reach them. I have seen a medicine
That's able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With sprightly fire and motion, whose simple touch
Is powerful to araise King Pippen, nay,
To give great Charlemagne a pen in 's hand
And write to her a love line.

KING  What "her" is this?

LAFEW
Why, Doctor She. My lord, there's one arrived,
If you will see her. Now, by my faith and honor,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one that in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom, and constancy hath amazed me more
Than I dare blame my weakness. Will you see her--
For that is her demand--and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.

KING  Now, good Lafew,
Bring in the admiration, that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wond'ring how thou took'st it.

LAFEW  Nay, I'll fit you,
And not be all day neither.
[He goes to bring in Helen.]

KING
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.

[Enter Helen.]


LAFEW, [to Helen]  Nay, come your ways.

KING  This haste hath wings indeed.

LAFEW  Nay, come your ways.
This is his Majesty. Say your mind to him.
A traitor you do look like, but such traitors
His Majesty seldom fears. I am Cressid's uncle
That dare leave two together. Fare you well.
[He exits.]

KING
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?

HELEN  Ay, my good lord,
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
In what he did profess well found.

KING  I knew him.

HELEN
The rather will I spare my praises towards him.
Knowing him is enough. On 's bed of death
Many receipts he gave me, chiefly one
Which, as the dearest issue of his practice,
And of his old experience th' only darling,
He bade me store up as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two, more dear. I have so,
And hearing your high Majesty is touched
With that malignant cause wherein the honor
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
I come to tender it and my appliance
With all bound humbleness.

KING  We thank you, maiden,
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned doctors leave us and
The congregated college have concluded
That laboring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidible estate. I say we must not
So stain our judgment or corrupt our hope
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit to esteem
A senseless help when help past sense we deem.

HELEN
My duty, then, shall pay me for my pains.
I will no more enforce mine office on you,
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
A modest one to bear me back again.

KING
I cannot give thee less, to be called grateful.
Thou thought'st to help me, and such thanks I give
As one near death to those that wish him live.
But what at full I know, thou know'st no part,
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.

HELEN
What I can do can do no hurt to try
Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy.
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister.
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown
When judges have been babes. Great floods have flown
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the great'st been denied.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
Where most it promises, and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest and despair most shifts.

KING
I must not hear thee. Fare thee well, kind maid.
Thy pains, not used, must by thyself be paid.
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.

HELEN
Inspired merit so by breath is barred.
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows;
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavors give consent.
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an impostor that proclaim
Myself against the level of mine aim,
But know I think and think I know most sure
My art is not past power nor you past cure.

KING
Art thou so confident? Within what space
Hop'st thou my cure?

HELEN  The greatest grace lending grace,
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring;
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quenched her sleepy lamp;
Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
Hath told the thievish minutes, how they pass,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free, and sickness freely die.

KING
Upon thy certainty and confidence
What dar'st thou venture?

HELEN  Tax of impudence,
A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame;
Traduced by odious ballads, my maiden's name
Seared otherwise; nay, worse of worst, extended
With vilest torture let my life be ended.

KING
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak,
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate:
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime can happy call.
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Skill infinite or monstrous desperate.
Sweet practicer, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.

HELEN
If I break time or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserved. Not helping, death's my fee.
But if I help, what do you promise me?

KING
Make thy demand.

HELEN  But will you make it even?

KING
Ay, by my scepter and my hopes of heaven.

HELEN
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command.
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state;
But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.

KING
Here is my hand. The premises observed,
Thy will by my performance shall be served.
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know could not be more to trust:
From whence thou cam'st, how tended on; but rest
Unquestioned welcome and undoubted blessed.--
Give me some help here, ho!--If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.
[Flourish. They exit, the King assisted.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Countess and Fool.]


COUNTESS  Come on, sir. I shall now put you to the
height of your breeding.

FOOL  I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught. I
know my business is but to the court.

COUNTESS  "To the court"? Why, what place make you
special when you put off that with such contempt?
"But to the court"?

FOOL  Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners,
he may easily put it off at court. He that cannot
make a leg, put off 's cap, kiss his hand, and
say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap;
and indeed such a fellow, to say precisely, were
not for the court. But, for me, I have an answer
will serve all men.

COUNTESS  Marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all
questions.

FOOL  It is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks:
the pin-buttock, the quatch-buttock, the brawn-buttock,
or any buttock.

COUNTESS  Will your answer serve fit to all questions?

FOOL  As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney,
as your French crown for your taffety punk, as
Tib's rush for Tom's forefinger, as a pancake for
Shrove Tuesday, a morris for May Day, as the nail
to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding
quean to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the
friar's mouth, nay, as the pudding to his skin.

COUNTESS  Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness
for all questions?

FOOL  From below your duke to beneath your constable,
it will fit any question.

COUNTESS  It must be an answer of most monstrous
size that must fit all demands.

FOOL  But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
should speak truth of it. Here it is, and all that
belongs to 't. Ask me if I am a courtier; it shall do
you no harm to learn.

COUNTESS  To be young again, if we could! I will be a
fool in question, hoping to be the wiser by your
answer. I pray you, sir, are you a courtier?

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--There's a simple putting off. More,
more, a hundred of them.

COUNTESS  Sir, I am a poor friend of yours that loves
you.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Thick, thick. Spare not me.

COUNTESS  I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely
meat.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Nay, put me to 't, I warrant you.

COUNTESS  You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Spare not me.

COUNTESS  Do you cry "O Lord, sir!" at your whipping,
and "spare not me"? Indeed your "O Lord, sir!" is
very sequent to your whipping. You would answer
very well to a whipping if you were but bound to 't.

FOOL  I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my "O Lord,
sir!" I see things may serve long but not serve ever.

COUNTESS  I play the noble huswife with the time to
entertain it so merrily with a fool.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Why, there 't serves well again.

COUNTESS, [giving him a paper]
An end, sir. To your business. Give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back.
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son.
This is not much.

FOOL  Not much commendation to them?

COUNTESS
Not much employment for you. You understand me.

FOOL  Most fruitfully. I am there before my legs.

COUNTESS  Haste you again.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Count Bertram, Lafew, and Parolles.]


LAFEW  They say miracles are past, and we have our
philosophical persons to make modern and familiar
things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it
that we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves
into seeming knowledge when we should
submit ourselves to an unknown fear.

PAROLLES  Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that
hath shot out in our latter times.

BERTRAM  And so 'tis.

LAFEW  To be relinquished of the artists--

PAROLLES  So I say, both of Galen and Paracelsus.

LAFEW  Of all the learned and authentic fellows--

PAROLLES  Right, so I say.

LAFEW  That gave him out incurable--

PAROLLES  Why, there 'tis. So say I too.

LAFEW  Not to be helped.

PAROLLES  Right, as 'twere a man assured of a--

LAFEW  Uncertain life and sure death.

PAROLLES  Just. You say well. So would I have said.

LAFEW  I may truly say it is a novelty to the world.

PAROLLES  It is indeed. If you will have it in showing,
you shall read it in what-do-you-call there.
[He points to a paper in Lafew's hand.]

LAFEW [reads]  A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly
actor.

PAROLLES  That's it. I would have said the very same.

LAFEW  Why, your dolphin is not lustier. 'Fore me, I
speak in respect--

PAROLLES  Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange; that is the
brief and the tedious of it; and he's of a most facinorous
spirit that will not acknowledge it to be
the--

LAFEW  Very hand of heaven.

PAROLLES  Ay, so I say.

LAFEW  In a most weak--

PAROLLES  And debile minister. Great power, great
transcendence, which should indeed give us a further
use to be made than alone the recov'ry of the
King, as to be--

LAFEW  Generally thankful.

[Enter King, Helen, and Attendants.]


PAROLLES  I would have said it. You say well. Here
comes the King.

LAFEW  Lustig, as the Dutchman says. I'll like a maid
the better whilst I have a tooth in my head. Why,
he's able to lead her a coranto.

PAROLLES  Mort du vinaigre! Is not this Helen?

LAFEW  'Fore God, I think so.

KING
Go, call before me all the lords in court.
[An Attendant exits.]
Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side,
And with this healthful hand, whose banished sense
Thou hast repealed, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Which but attends thy naming.

[Enter three or four Court Lords.]

Fair maid, send forth thine eye. This youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
I have to use. Thy frank election make.
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.

HELEN
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
Fall when Love please! Marry, to each but one.

LAFEW, [aside]
I'd give bay Curtal and his furniture
My mouth no more were broken than these boys'
And writ as little beard.

KING  Peruse them well.
Not one of those but had a noble father.

HELEN  Gentlemen,
Heaven hath through me restored the King to health.

ALL
We understand it and thank heaven for you.

HELEN
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest
That I protest I simply am a maid.--
Please it your Majesty, I have done already.
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me:
"We blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be
refused,
Let the white death sit on thy cheek forever;
We'll ne'er come there again."

KING  Make choice and see.
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.

HELEN
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream.	[She addresses her to a Lord.]
Sir, will you hear my suit?

FIRST COURT LORD
And grant it.

HELEN  Thanks, sir. All the
rest is mute.

LAFEW, [aside]  I had rather be in this choice than
throw ambs-ace for my life.

HELEN, [to another Lord]
The honor, sir, that flames in your fair eyes
Before I speak too threat'ningly replies.
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes, and her humble love.

SECOND COURT LORD
No better, if you please.

HELEN  My wish receive,
Which great Love grant, and so I take my leave.

LAFEW, [aside]  Do all they deny her? An they were sons
of mine, I'd have them whipped, or I would send
them to th' Turk to make eunuchs of.

HELEN, [to another Lord]
Be not afraid that I your hand should take.
I'll never do you wrong, for your own sake.
Blessing upon your vows, and in your bed
Find fairer fortune if you ever wed.

LAFEW, [aside]  These boys are boys of ice; they'll none
have her. Sure they are bastards to the English;
the French ne'er got 'em.

HELEN, [to another Lord]
You are too young, too happy, and too good
To make yourself a son out of my blood.

FOURTH COURT LORD  Fair one, I think not so.

LAFEW, [aside]  There's one grape yet. I am sure thy
father drunk wine. But if thou be'st not an ass, I
am a youth of fourteen; I have known thee already.

HELEN, [to Bertram]
I dare not say I take you, but I give
Me and my service ever whilst I live
Into your guiding power.--This is the man.

KING
Why then, young Bertram, take her. She's thy wife.

BERTRAM
My wife, my liege? I shall beseech your Highness
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.

KING  Know'st thou not,
Bertram,
What she has done for me?

BERTRAM  Yes, my good lord,
But never hope to know why I should marry her.

KING
Thou know'st she has raised me from my sickly bed.

BERTRAM
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well;
She had her breeding at my father's charge.
A poor physician's daughter my wife? Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever!

KING
'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which
I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
Of color, weight, and heat, poured all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stands off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislik'st--
"A poor physician's daughter"--thou dislik'st
Of virtue for the name. But do not so.
From lowest place whence virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by th' doer's deed.
Where great additions swell 's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honor. Good alone
Is good, without a name; vileness is so;
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
In these to nature she's immediate heir,
And these breed honor. That is honor's scorn
Which challenges itself as honor's born
And is not like the sire. Honors thrive
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our foregoers. The mere word's a slave
Debauched on every tomb, on every grave
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
Where dust and damned oblivion is the tomb
Of honored bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
I can create the rest. Virtue and she
Is her own dower, honor and wealth from me.

BERTRAM
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do 't.

KING
Thou wrong'st thyself if thou shouldst strive to
choose.

HELEN
That you are well restored, my lord, I'm glad.
Let the rest go.

KING
My honor's at the stake, which to defeat
I must produce my power.--Here, take her hand,
Proud, scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert; that canst not dream
We, poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
It is in us to plant thine honor where
We please to have it grow. Check thy contempt;
Obey our will, which travails in thy good.
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims,
Or I will throw thee from my care forever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance, both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee in the name of justice
Without all terms of pity. Speak. Thine answer.

BERTRAM
Pardon, my gracious lord, for I submit
My fancy to your eyes. When I consider
What great creation and what dole of honor
Flies where you bid it, I find that she which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base is now
The praised of the King, who, so ennobled,
Is as 'twere born so.

KING  Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine, to whom I promise
A counterpoise, if not to thy estate,
A balance more replete.

BERTRAM  I take her hand.

KING
Good fortune and the favor of the King
Smile upon this contract, whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief
And be performed tonight. The solemn feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lov'st her
Thy love's to me religious; else, does err.
[They exit. Parolles and Lafew stay behind,
commenting of this wedding.]

LAFEW  Do you hear, monsieur? A word with you.

PAROLLES  Your pleasure, sir.

LAFEW  Your lord and master did well to make his
recantation.

PAROLLES  "Recantation"? My "lord"? My "master"?

LAFEW  Ay. Is it not a language I speak?

PAROLLES  A most harsh one, and not to be understood
without bloody succeeding. My "master"?

LAFEW  Are you companion to the Count Rossillion?

PAROLLES  To any count, to all counts, to what is man.

LAFEW  To what is count's man. Count's master is of
another style.

PAROLLES  You are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are
too old.

LAFEW  I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man, to which
title age cannot bring thee.

PAROLLES  What I dare too well do, I dare not do.

LAFEW  I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a
pretty wise fellow; thou didst make tolerable vent
of thy travel; it might pass. Yet the scarves and the
bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me
from believing thee a vessel of too great a burden.
I have now found thee. When I lose thee again, I
care not. Yet art thou good for nothing but taking
up, and that thou 'rt scarce worth.

PAROLLES  Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity
upon thee--

LAFEW  Do not plunge thyself too far in anger lest thou
hasten thy trial, which if--Lord have mercy on
thee for a hen! So, my good window of lattice, fare
thee well; thy casement I need not open, for I look
through thee. Give me thy hand.

PAROLLES  My lord, you give me most egregious
indignity.

LAFEW  Ay, with all my heart, and thou art worthy of it.

PAROLLES  I have not, my lord, deserved it.

LAFEW  Yes, good faith, ev'ry dram of it, and I will not
bate thee a scruple.

PAROLLES  Well, I shall be wiser.

LAFEW  Ev'n as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to
pull at a smack o' th' contrary. If ever thou be'st
bound in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt find
what it is to be proud of thy bondage. I have a
desire to hold my acquaintance with thee, or
rather my knowledge, that I may say in the default
"He is a man I know."

PAROLLES  My lord, you do me most insupportable
vexation.

LAFEW  I would it were hell pains for thy sake, and my
poor doing eternal; for doing I am past, as I will by
thee in what motion age will give me leave.
[He exits.]

PAROLLES  Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace
off me. Scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must
be patient; there is no fettering of authority. I'll
beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with any
convenience, an he were double and double a lord.
I'll have no more pity of his age than I would have
of--I'll beat him, an if I could but meet him again.

[Enter Lafew.]


LAFEW  Sirrah, your lord and master's married. There's
news for you: you have a new mistress.

PAROLLES  I most unfeignedly beseech your Lordship
to make some reservation of your wrongs. He is
my good lord; whom I serve above is my master.

LAFEW  Who? God?

PAROLLES  Ay, sir.

LAFEW  The devil it is that's thy master. Why dost thou
garter up thy arms o' this fashion? Dost make hose
of thy sleeves? Do other servants so? Thou wert
best set thy lower part where thy nose stands. By
mine honor, if I were but two hours younger, I'd
beat thee. Methink'st thou art a general offense,
and every man should beat thee. I think thou wast
created for men to breathe themselves upon thee.

PAROLLES  This is hard and undeserved measure, my
lord.

LAFEW  Go to, sir. You were beaten in Italy for picking a
kernel out of a pomegranate. You are a vagabond,
and no true traveler. You are more saucy with
lords and honorable personages than the commission
of your birth and virtue gives you heraldry.
You are not worth another word; else I'd call you
knave. I leave you.	[He exits.]

PAROLLES  Good, very good! It is so, then. Good, very
good. Let it be concealed awhile.

[Enter Bertram Count Rossillion.]


BERTRAM
Undone, and forfeited to cares forever!

PAROLLES  What's the matter, sweetheart?

BERTRAM
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
I will not bed her.

PAROLLES  What, what, sweetheart?

BERTRAM
O my Parolles, they have married me!
I'll to the Tuscan wars and never bed her.

PAROLLES  France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
the tread of a man's foot. To th' wars!

BERTRAM  There's letters from my mother. What th'
import is I know not yet.

PAROLLES  Ay, that would be known. To th' wars, my
boy, to th' wars!
He wears his honor in a box unseen
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions!
France is a stable, we that dwell in 't jades.
Therefore, to th' war!

BERTRAM
It shall be so. I'll send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her
And wherefore I am fled, write to the King
That which I durst not speak. His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike. Wars is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.

PAROLLES
Will this capriccio hold in thee? Art sure?

BERTRAM
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.
I'll send her straight away. Tomorrow
I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.

PAROLLES
Why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'Tis hard.
A young man married is a man that's marred.
Therefore away, and leave her bravely. Go.
The King has done you wrong, but hush, 'tis so.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Helen with a paper, and Fool.]


HELEN  My mother greets me kindly. Is she well?

FOOL  She is not well, but yet she has her health. She's
very merry, but yet she is not well. But, thanks be
given, she's very well and wants nothing i' th' world,
but yet she is not well.

HELEN  If she be very well, what does she ail that she's
not very well?

FOOL  Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.

HELEN  What two things?

FOOL  One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send
her quickly; the other, that she's in Earth, from
whence God send her quickly.

[Enter Parolles.]


PAROLLES  Bless you, my fortunate lady.

HELEN  I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine
own good fortunes.

PAROLLES  You had my prayers to lead them on, and to
keep them on have them still.--O my knave, how
does my old lady?

FOOL  So that you had her wrinkles and I her money, I
would she did as you say.

PAROLLES  Why, I say nothing.

FOOL  Marry, you are the wiser man, for many a man's
tongue shakes out his master's undoing. To say
nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to
have nothing is to be a great part of your title,
which is within a very little of nothing.

PAROLLES  Away. Thou 'rt a knave.

FOOL  You should have said, sir, "Before a knave,
thou 'rt a knave"; that's "Before me, thou 'rt a
knave." This had been truth, sir.

PAROLLES  Go to. Thou art a witty fool. I have found
thee.

FOOL  Did you find me in yourself, sir, or were you
taught to find me?

PAROLLES  ...

FOOL  The search, sir, was profitable, and much fool
may you find in you, even to the world's pleasure
and the increase of laughter.

PAROLLES  A good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
Madam, my lord will go away tonight;
A very serious business calls on him.
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which as your due time claims, he does acknowledge
But puts it off to a compelled restraint,
Whose want and whose delay is strewed with sweets,
Which they distill now in the curbed time
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
And pleasure drown the brim.

HELEN  What's his will else?

PAROLLES
That you will take your instant leave o' th' King
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strengthened with what apology you think
May make it probable need.

HELEN  What more commands he?

PAROLLES
That, having this obtained, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.

HELEN
In everything I wait upon his will.

PAROLLES  I shall report it so.	[Parolles exits.]

HELEN, [to Fool]  I pray you, come, sirrah.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Lafew and Bertram.]


LAFEW  But I hope your Lordship thinks not him a
soldier.

BERTRAM  Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.

LAFEW  You have it from his own deliverance.

BERTRAM  And by other warranted testimony.

LAFEW  Then my dial goes not true. I took this lark for
a bunting.

BERTRAM  I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in
knowledge and accordingly valiant.

LAFEW  I have then sinned against his experience and
transgressed against his valor, and my state that
way is dangerous since I cannot yet find in my
heart to repent. Here he comes. I pray you make us
friends. I will pursue the amity.

[Enter Parolles.]


PAROLLES, [to Bertram]  These things shall be done, sir.

LAFEW, [to Bertram]  Pray you, sir, who's his tailor?

PAROLLES  Sir?

LAFEW  O, I know him well. Ay, sir, he, sir, 's a good
workman, a very good tailor.

BERTRAM, [aside to Parolles]  Is she gone to the King?

PAROLLES  She is.

BERTRAM  Will she away tonight?

PAROLLES  As you'll have her.

BERTRAM
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses, and tonight,
When I should take possession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.

LAFEW, [aside]  A good traveler is something at the latter
end of a dinner, but one that lies three thirds,
and uses a known truth to pass a thousand nothings
with, should be once heard and thrice beaten.--
God save you, captain.

BERTRAM, [to Parolles]  Is there any unkindness
between my lord and you, monsieur?

PAROLLES  I know not how I have deserved to run into
my lord's displeasure.

LAFEW  You have made shift to run into 't, boots and
spurs and all, like him that leapt into the custard;
and out of it you'll run again rather than suffer
question for your residence.

BERTRAM  It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.

LAFEW  And shall do so ever, though I took him at 's
prayers. Fare you well, my lord, and believe this of
me: there can be no kernel in this light nut. The
soul of this man is his clothes. Trust him not in
matter of heavy consequence. I have kept of them
tame and know their natures.--Farewell, monsieur.
I have spoken better of you than you have or
will to deserve at my hand, but we must do good
against evil.	[He exits.]

PAROLLES  An idle lord, I swear.

BERTRAM  I think not so.

PAROLLES  Why, do you not know him?

BERTRAM
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass.

[Enter Helen.]

Here comes my clog.

HELEN
I have, sir, as I was commanded from you,
Spoke with the King and have procured his leave
For present parting. Only he desires
Some private speech with you.

BERTRAM  I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not color with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled. This drives me to entreat you
That presently you take your way for home,
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you;
For my respects are better than they seem,
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not.	[Giving her a paper.]
This to my mother.
'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so
I leave you to your wisdom.

HELEN  Sir, I can nothing say
But that I am your most obedient servant--

BERTRAM
Come, come, no more of that.

HELEN  And ever shall
With true observance seek to eke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have failed
To equal my great fortune.

BERTRAM  Let that go.
My haste is very great. Farewell. Hie home.

HELEN
Pray, sir, your pardon.

BERTRAM  Well, what would you say?

HELEN
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
Nor dare I say 'tis mine--and yet it is--
But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
What law does vouch mine own.

BERTRAM  What would you have?

HELEN
Something, and scarce so much; nothing, indeed.
I would not tell you what I would, my lord. Faith,
yes:
Strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.

BERTRAM
I pray you stay not, but in haste to horse.

HELEN
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.--
Where are my other men?--Monsieur, farewell.
[She exits.]

BERTRAM
Go thou toward home, where I will never come
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.--
Away, and for our flight.

PAROLLES  Bravely, coraggio!
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence, the two French
Lords, with a troop of Soldiers.]


DUKE
So that from point to point now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth
And more thirsts after.

FIRST LORD  Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your Grace's part, black and fearful
On the opposer.

DUKE
Therefore we marvel much our cousin France
Would in so just a business shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers.

SECOND LORD  Good my lord,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield
But like a common and an outward man
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion; therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guessed.

DUKE  Be it his pleasure.

FIRST LORD
But I am sure the younger of our nation,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for physic.

DUKE  Welcome shall they be,
And all the honors that can fly from us
Shall on them settle. You know your places well.
When better fall, for your avails they fell.
Tomorrow to th' field.
[Flourish. They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Countess, with a paper, and Fool.]


COUNTESS  It hath happened all as I would have had it,
save that he comes not along with her.

FOOL  By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very
melancholy man.

COUNTESS  By what observance, I pray you?

FOOL  Why, he will look upon his boot and sing, mend
the ruff and sing, ask questions and sing, pick his
teeth and sing. I know a man that had this trick of
melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.

COUNTESS  Let me see what he writes and when he
means to come.	[She opens the letter.]

FOOL  I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court. Our
old lings and our Isbels o' th' country are nothing
like your old ling and your Isbels o' th' court. The
brains of my Cupid's knocked out, and I begin to
love as an old man loves money, with no stomach.

COUNTESS  What have we here?

FOOL  E'en that you have there.	[He exits.]

COUNTESS [reads.]  I have sent you a daughter-in-law.
She hath recovered the King and undone me. I have
wedded her, not bedded her, and sworn to make the
"not" eternal. You shall hear I am run away. Know it
before the report come. If there be breadth enough in
the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty to
you.
	Your unfortunate son,
Bertram.
This is not well, rash and unbridled boy:
To fly the favors of so good a king,
To pluck his indignation on thy head
By the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
For the contempt of empire.

[Enter Fool.]


FOOL  O madam, yonder is heavy news within, between
two soldiers and my young lady.

COUNTESS  What is the matter?

FOOL  Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some
comfort. Your son will not be killed so soon as I
thought he would.

COUNTESS  Why should he be killed?

FOOL  So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he
does. The danger is in standing to 't; that's the loss
of men, though it be the getting of children. Here
they come will tell you more. For my part, I only
hear your son was run away.	[He exits.]

[Enter Helen, with a paper, and two Gentlemen.]


FIRST GENTLEMAN, [to Countess]  Save you, good
madam.

HELEN
Madam, my lord is gone, forever gone.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Do not say so.

COUNTESS
Think upon patience, pray you.--Gentlemen,
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief
That the first face of neither on the start
Can woman me unto 't. Where is my son, I pray you?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
Madam, he's gone to serve the Duke of Florence.
We met him thitherward, for thence we came,
And, after some dispatch in hand at court,
Thither we bend again.

HELEN
Look on his letter, madam; here's my passport.
[She reads.] When thou canst get the ring upon
my finger, which never shall come off, and show me
a child begotten of thy body that I am father to, then
call me husband. But in such a "then" I write a
"never."
This is a dreadful sentence.

COUNTESS
Brought you this letter, gentlemen?

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Ay, madam,
And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pains.

COUNTESS
I prithee, lady, have a better cheer.
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
Thou robb'st me of a moiety. He was my son,
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child.--Towards Florence is he?

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Ay, madam.

COUNTESS  And to be a soldier?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
Such is his noble purpose, and, believe 't,
The Duke will lay upon him all the honor
That good convenience claims.

COUNTESS  Return you thither?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.

HELEN [reads]
Till I have no wife I have nothing in France.
'Tis bitter.

COUNTESS  Find you that there?

HELEN  Ay, madam.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
'Tis but the boldness of his hand, haply,
Which his heart was not consenting to.

COUNTESS
Nothing in France until he have no wife!
There's nothing here that is too good for him
But only she, and she deserves a lord
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
A servant only, and a gentleman
Which I have sometime known.

COUNTESS  Parolles was it not?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Ay, my good lady, he.

COUNTESS
A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
With his inducement.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Indeed, good lady,
The fellow has a deal of that too much
Which holds him much to have.

COUNTESS  You're welcome,
gentlemen.
I will entreat you when you see my son
To tell him that his sword can never win
The honor that he loses. More I'll entreat you
Written to bear along.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  We serve you, madam,
In that and all your worthiest affairs.

COUNTESS
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
Will you draw near?
[She exits with the Gentlemen.]

HELEN
"Till I have no wife I have nothing in France."
Nothing in France until he has no wife.
Thou shalt have none, Rossillion, none in France.
Then hast thou all again. Poor lord, is 't I
That chase thee from thy country and expose
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the none-sparing war? And is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim; move the still-'pearing air
That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord.
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there;
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
I am the caitiff that do hold him to 't;
And though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected. Better 'twere
I met the ravin lion when he roared
With sharp constraint of hunger; better 'twere
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No, come thou home, Rossillion,
Whence honor but of danger wins a scar,
As oft it loses all. I will be gone.
My being here it is that holds thee hence.
Shall I stay here to do 't? No, no, although
The air of paradise did fan the house
And angels officed all. I will be gone,
That pitiful rumor may report my flight
To consolate thine ear. Come, night; end, day;
For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.
[She exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence, Bertram Count
Rossillion, Drum and Trumpets, Soldiers, Parolles.]


DUKE, [to Bertram]
The general of our horse thou art, and we,
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune.

BERTRAM  Sir, it is
A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To th' extreme edge of hazard.

DUKE  Then go thou forth,
And Fortune play upon thy prosperous helm
As thy auspicious mistress.

BERTRAM  This very day,
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file.
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.
[All exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Countess and Steward, with a paper.]


COUNTESS
Alas! And would you take the letter of her?
Might you not know she would do as she has done
By sending me a letter? Read it again.

STEWARD [reads the letter]
	I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone.
	   Ambitious love hath so in me offended
	That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
	   With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
	Write, write, that from the bloody course of war
	   My dearest master, your dear son, may hie.
	Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far
	   His name with zealous fervor sanctify.
	His taken labors bid him me forgive;
	   I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
	From courtly friends, with camping foes to live
	   Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth.
	He is too good and fair for death and me,
	Whom I myself embrace to set him free.

COUNTESS
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much
As letting her pass so. Had I spoke with her,
I could have well diverted her intents,
Which thus she hath prevented.

STEWARD  Pardon me, madam.
If I had given you this at overnight,
She might have been o'erta'en. And yet she writes
Pursuit would be but vain.

COUNTESS  What angel shall
Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife.
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth
That he does weigh too light. My greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger.
When haply he shall hear that she is gone,
He will return; and hope I may that she,
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love. Which of them both
Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense
To make distinction. Provide this messenger.
My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak.
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[A tucket afar off. Enter old Widow of Florence, her
daughter Diana, and Mariana, with other Citizens.]


WIDOW  Nay, come, for if they do approach the city, we
shall lose all the sight.

DIANA  They say the French count has done most honorable
service.

WIDOW  It is reported that he has taken their great'st
commander, and that with his own hand he slew
the Duke's brother. [A trumpet sounds.] We have
lost our labor. They are gone a contrary way. Hark,
you may know by their trumpets.

MARIANA  Come, let's return again and suffice ourselves
with the report of it.--Well, Diana, take heed of
this French earl. The honor of a maid is her name,
and no legacy is so rich as honesty.

WIDOW, [to Diana]  I have told my neighbor how you
have been solicited by a gentleman, his
companion.

MARIANA  I know that knave, hang him! One Parolles, a
filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the
young earl.--Beware of them, Diana. Their promises,
enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these
engines of lust are not the things they go under.
Many a maid hath been seduced by them; and
the misery is example that so terrible shows in the
wrack of maidenhood cannot for all that dissuade
succession, but that they are limed with the twigs
that threatens them. I hope I need not to advise
you further, but I hope your own grace will keep
you where you are, though there were no further
danger known but the modesty which is so lost.

DIANA  You shall not need to fear me.

WIDOW  I hope so.

[Enter Helen as a pilgrim.]

Look, here comes a pilgrim. I know she will lie at
my house; thither they send one another. I'll question
her.--God save you, pilgrim. Whither are
bound?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  To Saint Jaques le Grand.
Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?

WIDOW
At the Saint Francis here beside the port.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Is this the way?	[A march afar.]

WIDOW
Ay, marry, is 't.--Hark you, they come this way.--
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodged,
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as myself.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Is it yourself?

WIDOW  If you shall please so, pilgrim.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]
I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.

WIDOW
You came I think from France?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  I did so.

WIDOW
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  His name, I pray you?

DIANA
The Count Rossillion. Know you such a one?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him.
His face I know not.

DIANA  Whatsome'er he is,
He's bravely taken here. He stole from France,
As 'tis reported, for the King had married him
Against his liking. Think you it is so?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]
Ay, surely, mere the truth. I know his lady.

DIANA
There is a gentleman that serves the Count
Reports but coarsely of her.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  What's his name?

DIANA
Monsieur Parolles.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  O, I believe with him.
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated. All her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I have not heard examined.

DIANA  Alas, poor lady,
'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
Of a detesting lord.

WIDOW
I warrant, good creature, wheresoe'er she is,
Her heart weighs sadly. This young maid might do
her
A shrewd turn if she pleased.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  How do you mean?
Maybe the amorous count solicits her
In the unlawful purpose?

WIDOW  He does indeed,
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honor of a maid,
But she is armed for him and keeps her guard
In honestest defense.

MARIANA
The gods forbid else!

[Drum and Colors. Enter Bertram Count Rossillion,
Parolles, and the whole Army.]


WIDOW  So, now they come.
That is Antonio, the Duke's eldest son;
That, Escalus.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Which is the Frenchman?

DIANA  He,
That with the plume. 'Tis a most gallant fellow.
I would he loved his wife. If he were honester,
He were much goodlier. Is 't not a handsome
gentleman?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  I like him well.

DIANA
'Tis pity he is not honest. Yond's that same knave
That leads him to these places. Were I his lady,
I would poison that vile rascal.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Which is he?

DIANA
That jackanapes with scarves. Why is he melancholy?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Perchance he's hurt i' th' battle.

PAROLLES  Lose our drum? Well.

MARIANA  He's shrewdly vexed at something. Look, he
has spied us.

WIDOW, [to Parolles]  Marry, hang you.

MARIANA, [to Parolles]  And your courtesy, for a
ring-carrier.
[Bertram, Parolles, and the army exit.]

WIDOW
The troop is passed. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host. Of enjoined penitents
There's four or five, to Great Saint Jaques bound,
Already at my house.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  I humbly thank you.
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
To eat with us tonight, the charge and thanking
Shall be for me. And to requite you further,
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin
Worthy the note.

BOTH  We'll take your offer kindly.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Bertram Count Rossillion and the French
Lords, as at first.]


FIRST LORD  Nay, good my lord, put him to 't. Let him
have his way.

SECOND LORD  If your Lordship find him not a hilding,
hold me no more in your respect.

FIRST LORD  On my life, my lord, a bubble.

BERTRAM  Do you think I am so far deceived in him?

FIRST LORD  Believe it, my lord. In mine own direct
knowledge, without any malice, but to speak of
him as my kinsman, he's a most notable coward,
an infinite and endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker,
the owner of no one good quality worthy
your Lordship's entertainment.

SECOND LORD  It were fit you knew him, lest, reposing
too far in his virtue, which he hath not, he might
at some great and trusty business in a main danger
fail you.

BERTRAM  I would I knew in what particular action to
try him.

SECOND LORD  None better than to let him fetch off his
drum, which you hear him so confidently undertake
to do.

FIRST LORD  I, with a troop of Florentines, will suddenly
surprise him. Such I will have whom I am sure
he knows not from the enemy. We will bind and
hoodwink him so, that he shall suppose no other
but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversary's
when we bring him to our own tents. Be but
your Lordship present at his examination. If he do
not for the promise of his life, and in the highest
compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you and
deliver all the intelligence in his power against
you, and that with the divine forfeit of his soul
upon oath, never trust my judgment in anything.

SECOND LORD  O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch
his drum. He says he has a stratagem for 't. When
your Lordship sees the bottom of his success in
't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump of ore
will be melted, if you give him not John Drum's
entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed.
Here he comes.

[Enter Parolles.]


FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  O, for the love of laughter,
hinder not the honor of his design. Let him
fetch off his drum in any hand.

BERTRAM, [to Parolles]  How now, monsieur? This
drum sticks sorely in your disposition.

SECOND LORD  A pox on 't! Let it go. 'Tis but a drum.

PAROLLES  But a drum! Is 't but a drum? A drum so
lost! There was excellent command, to charge in
with our horse upon our own wings and to rend
our own soldiers!

SECOND LORD  That was not to be blamed in the command
of the service. It was a disaster of war that
Caesar himself could not have prevented if he had
been there to command.

BERTRAM  Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success.
Some dishonor we had in the loss of that
drum, but it is not to be recovered.

PAROLLES  It might have been recovered.

BERTRAM  It might, but it is not now.

PAROLLES  It is to be recovered. But that the merit of
service is seldom attributed to the true and exact
performer, I would have that drum or another, or
hic jacet.

BERTRAM  Why, if you have a stomach, to 't, monsieur!
If you think your mystery in stratagem can bring
this instrument of honor again into his native
quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise and go
on. I will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit. If
you speed well in it, the Duke shall both speak of it
and extend to you what further becomes his greatness,
even to the utmost syllable of your
worthiness.

PAROLLES  By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.

BERTRAM  But you must not now slumber in it.

PAROLLES  I'll about it this evening, and I will presently
pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my
certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation;
and by midnight look to hear further from me.

BERTRAM  May I be bold to acquaint his Grace you are
gone about it?

PAROLLES  I know not what the success will be, my
lord, but the attempt I vow.

BERTRAM  I know thou 'rt valiant, and to the possibility
of thy soldiership will subscribe for thee. Farewell.

PAROLLES  I love not many words.	[He exits.]

FIRST LORD  No more than a fish loves water. Is not this
a strange fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems
to undertake this business which he knows is not
to be done, damns himself to do, and dares better
be damned than to do 't?

SECOND LORD  You do not know him, my lord, as we do.
Certain it is that he will steal himself into a man's
favor and for a week escape a great deal of discoveries,
but when you find him out, you have him
ever after.

BERTRAM  Why, do you think he will make no deed at
all of this that so seriously he does address himself
unto?

FIRST LORD  None in the world, but return with an
invention and clap upon you two or three probable
lies. But we have almost embossed him. You shall
see his fall tonight; for indeed he is not for your
Lordship's respect.

SECOND LORD  We'll make you some sport with the fox
ere we case him. He was first smoked by the old
Lord Lafew. When his disguise and he is parted,
tell me what a sprat you shall find him, which you
shall see this very night.

FIRST LORD  I must go look my twigs. He shall be
caught.

BERTRAM  Your brother he shall go along with me.

FIRST LORD  As 't please your Lordship. I'll leave you.
[He exits.]

BERTRAM
Now will I lead you to the house and show you
The lass I spoke of.

SECOND LORD  But you say she's honest.

BERTRAM
That's all the fault. I spoke with her but once
And found her wondrous cold. But I sent to her,
By this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
Tokens and letters, which she did re-send.
And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature.
Will you go see her?

SECOND LORD  With all my heart, my lord.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Helen and Widow.]


HELEN
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.

WIDOW
Though my estate be fall'n, I was well born,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses,
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.

HELEN  Nor would I wish you.
First give me trust the Count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.

WIDOW  I should believe you,
For you have showed me that which well approves
You're great in fortune.

HELEN  Take this purse of gold,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will overpay and pay again
When I have found it. The Count he woos your
daughter,
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
Resolved to carry her. Let her in fine consent
As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
Now his important blood will naught deny
That she'll demand. A ring the County wears
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son some four or five descents
Since the first father wore it. This ring he holds
In most rich choice. Yet, in his idle fire,
To buy his will it would not seem too dear,
Howe'er repented after.

WIDOW
Now I see the bottom of your purpose.

HELEN
You see it lawful, then. It is no more
But that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
Desires this ring, appoints him an encounter,
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Herself most chastely absent. After,
To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns
To what is passed already.

WIDOW  I have yielded.
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts and songs composed
To her unworthiness. It nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves, for he persists
As if his life lay on 't.

HELEN  Why then tonight
Let us assay our plot, which, if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed,
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
But let's about it.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter one of the French Lords, with five or six other
Soldiers in ambush.]


LORD  He can come no other way but by this hedge
corner. When you sally upon him, speak what terrible
language you will. Though you understand it
not yourselves, no matter. For we must not seem to
understand him, unless some one among us whom
we must produce for an interpreter.

FIRST SOLDIER  Good captain, let me be th' interpreter.

LORD  Art not acquainted with him? Knows he not thy
voice?

FIRST SOLDIER  No, sir, I warrant you.

LORD  But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to speak to
us again?

FIRST SOLDIER  E'en such as you speak to me.

LORD  He must think us some band of strangers i' th'
adversary's entertainment. Now, he hath a smack
of all neighboring languages. Therefore we must
every one be a man of his own fancy, not to know
what we speak one to another. So we seem to know
is to know straight our purpose: choughs' language,
gabble enough and good enough. As for
you, interpreter, you must seem very politic. But
couch, ho! Here he comes to beguile two hours in
a sleep and then to return and swear the lies he
forges.	[They move aside.]

[Enter Parolles.]


PAROLLES  Ten o'clock. Within these three hours 'twill
be time enough to go home. What shall I say I have
done? It must be a very plausive invention that
carries it. They begin to smoke me, and disgraces
have of late knocked too often at my door. I find
my tongue is too foolhardy, but my heart hath the
fear of Mars before it, and of his creatures, not
daring the reports of my tongue.

LORD, [aside]  This is the first truth that e'er thine own
tongue was guilty of.

PAROLLES  What the devil should move me to undertake
the recovery of this drum, being not ignorant
of the impossibility and knowing I had no such
purpose? I must give myself some hurts and say I
got them in exploit. Yet slight ones will not carry it.
They will say "Came you off with so little?" And
great ones I dare not give. Wherefore? What's the
instance? Tongue, I must put you into a butter-woman's
mouth and buy myself another of
Bajazeth's mule if you prattle me into these perils.

LORD, [aside]  Is it possible he should know what he is,
and be that he is?

PAROLLES  I would the cutting of my garments would
serve the turn, or the breaking of my Spanish
sword.

LORD, [aside]  We cannot afford you so.

PAROLLES  Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was
in stratagem.

LORD, [aside]  'Twould not do.

PAROLLES  Or to drown my clothes and say I was
stripped.

LORD, [aside]  Hardly serve.

PAROLLES  Though I swore I leapt from the window of
the citadel--

LORD, [aside]  How deep?

PAROLLES  Thirty fathom.

LORD, [aside]  Three great oaths would scarce make
that be believed.

PAROLLES  I would I had any drum of the enemy's. I
would swear I recovered it.

LORD, [aside]  You shall hear one anon.

PAROLLES  A drum, now, of the enemy's--
[Alarum within.]

LORD, [advancing]  Throca movousus, cargo, cargo,
cargo.

ALL  Cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo.
[They seize him.]

PAROLLES  O ransom, ransom! Do not hide mine eyes.
[They blindfold him.]

FIRST SOLDIER  Boskos thromuldo boskos.

PAROLLES
I know you are the Muskos' regiment,
And I shall lose my life for want of language.
If there be here German or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me.
I'll discover that which shall undo the Florentine.

FIRST SOLDIER  Boskos vauvado, I understand thee and
can speak thy tongue. Kerelybonto, sir, betake thee
to thy faith, for seventeen poniards are at thy
bosom.

PAROLLES  O!

FIRST SOLDIER  O, pray, pray, pray! Manka reuania
dulche.

LORD  Oscorbidulchos voliuorco.

FIRST SOLDIER
The General is content to spare thee yet
And, hoodwinked as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Haply thou mayst inform
Something to save thy life.

PAROLLES  O, let me live,
And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
Their force, their purposes. Nay, I'll speak that
Which you will wonder at.

FIRST SOLDIER  But wilt thou faithfully?

PAROLLES  If I do not, damn me.

FIRST SOLDIER  Acordo linta. Come on, thou art
granted space.
[He exits with Parolles under guard.]
[A short alarum within.]

LORD
Go tell the Count Rossillion and my brother
We have caught the woodcock and will keep him
muffled
Till we do hear from them.

SECOND SOLDIER  Captain, I will.

LORD
He will betray us all unto ourselves.
Inform on that.

SECOND SOLDIER  So I will, sir.

LORD
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely locked.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Bertram and the maid called Diana.]


BERTRAM
They told me that your name was Fontibell.

DIANA
No, my good lord, Diana.

BERTRAM  Titled goddess,
And worth it, with addition. But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no maiden but a monument.
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now, for you are cold and stern,
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self was got.

DIANA
She then was honest.

BERTRAM  So should you be.

DIANA  No.
My mother did but duty--such, my lord,
As you owe to your wife.

BERTRAM  No more o' that.
I prithee do not strive against my vows.
I was compelled to her, but I love thee
By love's own sweet constraint, and will forever
Do thee all rights of service.

DIANA  Ay, so you serve us
Till we serve you. But when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves
And mock us with our bareness.

BERTRAM  How have I sworn!

DIANA
'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
But the plain single vow that is vowed true.
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the high'st to witness. Then pray you, tell
me,
If I should swear by Jove's great attributes
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths
When I did love you ill? This has no holding
To swear by him whom I protest to love
That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
Are words, and poor conditions but unsealed,
At least in my opinion.

BERTRAM  Change it, change it.
Be not so holy-cruel. Love is holy,
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins shall so persever.

DIANA
I see that men may rope 's in such a snare
That we'll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.

BERTRAM
I'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
To give it from me.

DIANA  Will you not, my lord?

BERTRAM
It is an honor 'longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose.

DIANA  Mine honor's such a ring.
My chastity's the jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose. Thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the champion Honor on my part
Against your vain assault.

BERTRAM  Here, take my ring.
My house, mine honor, yea, my life be thine,
And I'll be bid by thee.

DIANA
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber
window.
I'll order take my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquered my yet maiden bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me.
My reasons are most strong, and you shall know them
When back again this ring shall be delivered.
And on your finger in the night I'll put
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
May token to the future our past deeds.
Adieu till then; then, fail not. You have won
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.

BERTRAM
A heaven on Earth I have won by wooing thee.

DIANA
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
You may so in the end.	[He exits.]
My mother told me just how he would woo
As if she sat in 's heart. She says all men
Have the like oaths. He had sworn to marry me
When his wife's dead. Therefore I'll lie with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a maid.
Only, in this disguise I think 't no sin
To cozen him that would unjustly win.
[She exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter the two French Lords and some two
or three Soldiers.]


FIRST LORD  You have not given him his mother's
letter?

SECOND LORD  I have delivered it an hour since. There
is something in 't that stings his nature, for on the
reading it he changed almost into another man.

FIRST LORD  He has much worthy blame laid upon him
for shaking off so good a wife and so sweet a lady.

SECOND LORD  Especially he hath incurred the everlasting
displeasure of the King, who had even tuned
his bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you
a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.

FIRST LORD  When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I
am the grave of it.

SECOND LORD  He hath perverted a young gentlewoman
here in Florence of a most chaste renown,
and this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her
honor. He hath given her his monumental ring and
thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.

FIRST LORD  Now God delay our rebellion! As we are
ourselves, what things are we!

SECOND LORD  Merely our own traitors. And, as in the
common course of all treasons we still see them
reveal themselves till they attain to their abhorred
ends, so he that in this action contrives against his
own nobility, in his proper stream o'erflows
himself.

FIRST LORD  Is it not meant damnable in us to be trumpeters
of our unlawful intents? We shall not, then,
have his company tonight?

SECOND LORD  Not till after midnight, for he is dieted to
his hour.

FIRST LORD  That approaches apace. I would gladly
have him see his company anatomized, that he
might take a measure of his own judgments
wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.

SECOND LORD  We will not meddle with him till he
come, for his presence must be the whip of the
other.

FIRST LORD  In the meantime, what hear you of these
wars?

SECOND LORD  I hear there is an overture of peace.

FIRST LORD  Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.

SECOND LORD  What will Count Rossillion do then?
Will he travel higher or return again into France?

FIRST LORD  I perceive by this demand you are not altogether
of his counsel.

SECOND LORD  Let it be forbid, sir! So should I be a
great deal of his act.

FIRST LORD  Sir, his wife some two months since fled
from his house. Her pretense is a pilgrimage to
Saint Jaques le Grand, which holy undertaking
with most austere sanctimony she accomplished.
And, there residing, the tenderness of her nature
became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a groan
of her last breath, and now she sings in heaven.

SECOND LORD  How is this justified?

FIRST LORD  The stronger part of it by her own letters,
which makes her story true even to the point of her
death. Her death itself, which could not be her
office to say is come, was faithfully confirmed by
the rector of the place.

SECOND LORD  Hath the Count all this intelligence?

FIRST LORD  Ay, and the particular confirmations, point
from point, to the full arming of the verity.

SECOND LORD  I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of
this.

FIRST LORD  How mightily sometimes we make us
comforts of our losses.

SECOND LORD  And how mightily some other times we
drown our gain in tears. The great dignity that his
valor hath here acquired for him shall at home be
encountered with a shame as ample.

FIRST LORD  The web of our life is of a mingled yarn,
good and ill together. Our virtues would be proud
if our faults whipped them not, and our crimes
would despair if they were not cherished by our
virtues.

[Enter a Servant.]

How now? Where's your master?

SERVANT  He met the Duke in the street, sir, of whom
he hath taken a solemn leave. His Lordship will
next morning for France. The Duke hath offered
him letters of commendations to the King.

SECOND LORD  They shall be no more than needful
there, if they were more than they can commend.
They cannot be too sweet for the King's tartness.

[Enter Bertram Count Rossillion.]

Here's his Lordship now.--How now, my lord? Is 't
not after midnight?

BERTRAM  I have tonight dispatched sixteen businesses,
a month's length apiece. By an abstract of
success: I have congeed with the Duke, done my
adieu with his nearest, buried a wife, mourned for
her, writ to my lady mother I am returning, entertained
my convoy, and between these main parcels
of dispatch effected many nicer needs. The last
was the greatest, but that I have not ended yet.

SECOND LORD  If the business be of any difficulty, and
this morning your departure hence, it requires
haste of your Lordship.

BERTRAM  I mean the business is not ended as fearing
to hear of it hereafter. But shall we have this dialogue
between the Fool and the Soldier? Come,
bring forth this counterfeit module; has deceived
me like a double-meaning prophesier.

SECOND LORD  Bring him forth. Has sat i' th' stocks all
night, poor gallant knave.	[Soldiers exit.]

BERTRAM  No matter. His heels have deserved it in
usurping his spurs so long. How does he carry
himself?

SECOND LORD  I have told your Lordship already: the
stocks carry him. But to answer you as you would
be understood: he weeps like a wench that had
shed her milk. He hath confessed himself to Morgan,
whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time
of his remembrance to this very instant disaster of
his setting i' th' stocks. And what think you he hath
confessed?

BERTRAM  Nothing of me, has he?

SECOND LORD  His confession is taken, and it shall be
read to his face. If your Lordship be in 't, as I
believe you are, you must have the patience to
hear it.

[Enter Parolles, blindfolded, with his Interpreter,
the First Soldier.]


BERTRAM  A plague upon him! Muffled! He can say
nothing of me.

FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  Hush, hush. Hoodman
comes.--Portotartarossa.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  He calls for the tortures.
What will you say without 'em?

PAROLLES  I will confess what I know without constraint.
If you pinch me like a pasty, I can say no
more.

FIRST SOLDIER  Bosko Chimurcho.

FIRST LORD  Boblibindo chicurmurco.

FIRST SOLDIER  You are a merciful general.--Our general
bids you answer to what I shall ask you out of a
note.

PAROLLES  And truly, as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER, [as if reading a note]  First, demand of
him how many horse the Duke is strong.--What say
you to that?

PAROLLES  Five or six thousand, but very weak and
unserviceable. The troops are all scattered, and the
commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputation
and credit, and as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER  Shall I set down your answer so?

PAROLLES  Do. I'll take the Sacrament on 't, how and
which way you will.

BERTRAM, [aside]  All's one to him. What a past-saving
slave is this!

FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  You're deceived, my
lord. This is Monsieur Parolles, the gallant
militarist--that was his own phrase--that had the
whole theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and
the practice in the chape of his dagger.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  I will never trust a man again for
keeping his sword clean, nor believe he can have
everything in him by wearing his apparel neatly.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  Well, that's set down.

PAROLLES  "Five or six thousand horse," I said--I will
say true--"or thereabouts" set down, for I'll speak
truth.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  He's very near the truth in this.

BERTRAM, [aside]  But I con him no thanks for 't, in the
nature he delivers it.

PAROLLES  "Poor rogues," I pray you say.

FIRST SOLDIER  Well, that's set down.

PAROLLES  I humbly thank you, sir. A truth's a truth.
The rogues are marvelous poor.

FIRST SOLDIER, [as if reading a note]  Demand of him of
what strength they are o' foot.--What say you to
that?

PAROLLES  By my troth, sir, if I were to live but this
present hour, I will tell true. Let me see: Spurio a
hundred and fifty, Sebastian so many, Corambus
so many, Jaques so many; Guiltian, Cosmo,
Lodowick and Gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine
own company, Chitopher, Vaumond, Bentii, two
hundred fifty each; so that the muster-file, rotten
and sound, upon my life amounts not to fifteen
thousand poll, half of the which dare not shake the
snow from off their cassocks lest they shake themselves
to pieces.

BERTRAM, [aside]  What shall be done to him?

FIRST LORD, [aside]  Nothing but let him have thanks.
[(Aside to First Soldier.)] Demand of him my condition
and what credit I have with the Duke.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  Well, that's set down. [Pretending
to read:] You shall demand of him whether
one Captain Dumaine be i' th' camp, a Frenchman;
what his reputation is with the Duke, what his valor,
honesty, and expertness in wars; or whether he
thinks it were not possible with well-weighing sums
of gold to corrupt him to a revolt.--What say you to
this? What do you know of it?

PAROLLES  I beseech you let me answer to the particular
of the inter'gatories. Demand them singly.

FIRST SOLDIER  Do you know this Captain Dumaine?

PAROLLES  I know him. He was a botcher's prentice in
Paris, from whence he was whipped for getting the
shrieve's fool with child, a dumb innocent that
could not say him nay.

BERTRAM, [aside to First Lord]  Nay, by your leave, hold
your hands, though I know his brains are forfeit to
the next tile that falls.

FIRST SOLDIER  Well, is this captain in the Duke of
Florence's camp?

PAROLLES  Upon my knowledge he is, and lousy.

FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  Nay, look not so upon
me. We shall hear of your Lordship anon.

FIRST SOLDIER  What is his reputation with the Duke?

PAROLLES  The Duke knows him for no other but a
poor officer of mine, and writ to me this other day
to turn him out o' th' band. I think I have his letter
in my pocket.

FIRST SOLDIER  Marry, we'll search.
[They search Parolles' pockets.]

PAROLLES  In good sadness, I do not know. Either it is
there, or it is upon a file with the Duke's other letters
in my tent.

FIRST SOLDIER  Here 'tis; here's a paper. Shall I read it to
you?

PAROLLES  I do not know if it be it or no.

BERTRAM, [aside]  Our interpreter does it well.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  Excellently.

FIRST SOLDIER [reads]  Dian, the Count's a fool and full
of gold--

PAROLLES  That is not the Duke's letter, sir. That is an
advertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one
Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count
Rossillion, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very
ruttish. I pray you, sir, put it up again.

FIRST SOLDIER  Nay, I'll read it first, by your favor.

PAROLLES  My meaning in 't, I protest, was very honest
in the behalf of the maid, for I knew the young
count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is
a whale to virginity and devours up all the fry it
finds.

BERTRAM, [aside]  Damnable both-sides rogue!

FIRST SOLDIER [reads]
	When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and
take it.
	   After he scores, he never pays the score.
	Half won is match well made. Match, and well
make it.
	   He ne'er pays after-debts. Take it before.
	And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this:
	Men are to mell with; boys are not to kiss.
	For count of this: the Count's a fool, I know it,
	Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
	Thine, as he vowed to thee in thine ear,
Parolles.

BERTRAM, [aside]  He shall be whipped through the
army with this rhyme in 's forehead.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  This is your devoted friend, sir,
the manifold linguist and the armipotent soldier.

BERTRAM, [aside]  I could endure anything before but a
cat, and now he's a cat to me.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  I perceive, sir, by our
general's looks we shall be fain to hang you.

PAROLLES  My life, sir, in any case! Not that I am afraid
to die, but that, my offenses being many, I would
repent out the remainder of nature. Let me live,
sir, in a dungeon, i' th' stocks, or anywhere, so I
may live.

FIRST SOLDIER  We'll see what may be done, so you confess
freely. Therefore once more to this Captain
Dumaine: you have answered to his reputation
with the Duke, and to his valor. What is his
honesty?

PAROLLES  He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister. For
rapes and ravishments, he parallels Nessus. He
professes not keeping of oaths. In breaking 'em he
is stronger than Hercules. He will lie, sir, with such
volubility that you would think truth were a fool.
Drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be
swine-drunk, and in his sleep he does little harm,
save to his bedclothes about him; but they know
his conditions and lay him in straw. I have but
little more to say, sir, of his honesty; he has everything
that an honest man should not have; what an
honest man should have, he has nothing.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  I begin to love him for this.

BERTRAM, [aside]  For this description of thine honesty?
A pox upon him! For me, he's more and more
a cat.

FIRST SOLDIER  What say you to his expertness in war?

PAROLLES  Faith, sir, has led the drum before the English
tragedians. To belie him I will not, and more
of his soldiership I know not, except in that country
he had the honor to be the officer at a place
there called Mile End, to instruct for the doubling
of files. I would do the man what honor I can, but
of this I am not certain.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  He hath out-villained villainy so
far that the rarity redeems him.

BERTRAM, [aside]  A pox on him! He's a cat still.

FIRST SOLDIER  His qualities being at this poor price,
I need not to ask you if gold will corrupt him to
revolt.

PAROLLES  Sir, for a cardecu he will sell the fee-simple
of his salvation, the inheritance of it, and cut th'
entail from all remainders, and a perpetual succession
for it perpetually.

FIRST SOLDIER  What's his brother, the other Captain
Dumaine?

SECOND LORD, [aside]  Why does he ask him of me?

FIRST SOLDIER  What's he?

PAROLLES  E'en a crow o' th' same nest: not altogether
so great as the first in goodness, but greater a great
deal in evil. He excels his brother for a coward, yet
his brother is reputed one of the best that is. In a
retreat he outruns any lackey. Marry, in coming on
he has the cramp.

FIRST SOLDIER  If your life be saved, will you undertake
to betray the Florentine?

PAROLLES  Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count
Rossillion.

FIRST SOLDIER  I'll whisper with the General and know
his pleasure.

PAROLLES, [aside]  I'll no more drumming. A plague of
all drums! Only to seem to deserve well, and to
beguile the supposition of that lascivious young
boy the Count, have I run into this danger. Yet who
would have suspected an ambush where I was
taken?

FIRST SOLDIER  There is no remedy, sir, but you must
die. The General says you that have so traitorously
discovered the secrets of your army and made
such pestiferous reports of men very nobly held
can serve the world for no honest use. Therefore
you must die.--Come, headsman, off with his
head.

PAROLLES  O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my
death!

FIRST SOLDIER  That shall you, and take your leave of
all your friends. [He removes the blindfold.] So,
look about you. Know you any here?

BERTRAM  Good morrow, noble captain.

SECOND LORD  God bless you, Captain Parolles.

FIRST LORD  God save you, noble captain.

SECOND LORD  Captain, what greeting will you to my
Lord Lafew? I am for France.

FIRST LORD  Good captain, will you give me a copy of
the sonnet you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count
Rossillion? An I were not a very coward, I'd compel
it of you. But fare you well.
[Bertram and Lords exit.]

FIRST SOLDIER  You are undone, captain--all but your
scarf; that has a knot on 't yet.

PAROLLES  Who cannot be crushed with a plot?

FIRST SOLDIER  If you could find out a country where
but women were that had received so much
shame, you might begin an impudent nation. Fare
you well, sir. I am for France too. We shall speak of
you there.	[He exits.]

PAROLLES
Yet am I thankful. If my heart were great,
'Twould burst at this. Captain I'll be no more,
But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft
As captain shall. Simply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this, for it will come to pass
That every braggart shall be found an ass.
Rust, sword; cool, blushes; and Parolles live
Safest in shame. Being fooled, by fool'ry thrive.
There's place and means for every man alive.
I'll after them.	[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Helen, Widow, and Diana.]


HELEN
That you may well perceive I have not wronged you,
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety, 'fore whose throne 'tis needful,
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
Time was, I did him a desired office
Dear almost as his life, which gratitude
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth
And answer thanks. I duly am informed
His Grace is at Marseilles, to which place
We have convenient convoy. You must know
I am supposed dead. The army breaking,
My husband hies him home, where, heaven aiding
And by the leave of my good lord the King,
We'll be before our welcome.

WIDOW  Gentle madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.

HELEN  Nor you, mistress,
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labor
To recompense your love. Doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But O, strange men,
That can such sweet use make of what they hate
When saucy trusting of the cozened thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night! So lust doth play
With what it loathes for that which is away.
But more of this hereafter.--You, Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf.

DIANA  Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.

HELEN  Yet, I pray you--
But with the word "The time will bring on summer,"
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away.
Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us.
All's well that ends well. Still the fine's the crown.
Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Fool, Countess, and Lafew.]


LAFEW  No, no, no, your son was misled with a
snipped-taffeta fellow there, whose villainous saffron
would have made all the unbaked and doughy
youth of a nation in his color. Your daughter-in-law
had been alive at this hour, and your son here
at home, more advanced by the King than by that
red-tailed humble-bee I speak of.

COUNTESS  I would I had not known him. It was the
death of the most virtuous gentlewoman that ever
nature had praise for creating. If she had partaken
of my flesh and cost me the dearest groans of a
mother, I could not have owed her a more rooted
love.

LAFEW  'Twas a good lady, 'twas a good lady. We may
pick a thousand salads ere we light on such another
herb.

FOOL  Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the
salad, or rather the herb of grace.

LAFEW  They are not herbs, you knave. They are
nose-herbs.

FOOL  I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir. I have not
much skill in grass.

LAFEW  Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a
fool?

FOOL  A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a
man's.

LAFEW  Your distinction?

FOOL  I would cozen the man of his wife and do his
service.

LAFEW  So you were a knave at his service indeed.

FOOL  And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do
her service.

LAFEW  I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave
and fool.

FOOL  At your service.

LAFEW  No, no, no.

FOOL  Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as
great a prince as you are.

LAFEW  Who's that, a Frenchman?

FOOL  Faith, sir, he has an English name, but his
phys'nomy is more hotter in France than there.

LAFEW  What prince is that?

FOOL  The black prince, sir, alias the prince of darkness,
alias the devil.

LAFEW, [giving him money]  Hold thee, there's my
purse. I give thee not this to suggest thee from thy
master thou talk'st of. Serve him still.

FOOL  I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a
great fire, and the master I speak of ever keeps a
good fire. But sure he is the prince of the world; let
his Nobility remain in 's court. I am for the house
with the narrow gate, which I take to be too little
for pomp to enter. Some that humble themselves
may, but the many will be too chill and tender, and
they'll be for the flow'ry way that leads to the
broad gate and the great fire.

LAFEW  Go thy ways. I begin to be aweary of thee. And
I tell thee so before because I would not fall out
with thee. Go thy ways. Let my horses be well
looked to, without any tricks.

FOOL  If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be
jades' tricks, which are their own right by the law
of nature.	[He exits.]

LAFEW  A shrewd knave and an unhappy.

COUNTESS  So he is. My lord that's gone made himself
much sport out of him. By his authority he
remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his
sauciness, and indeed he has no pace, but runs
where he will.

LAFEW  I like him well. 'Tis not amiss. And I was about
to tell you, since I heard of the good lady's death
and that my lord your son was upon his return
home, I moved the King my master to speak in the
behalf of my daughter, which in the minority of
them both his Majesty out of a self-gracious
remembrance did first propose. His Highness hath
promised me to do it, and to stop up the displeasure
he hath conceived against your son there is
no fitter matter. How does your Ladyship like it?

COUNTESS  With very much content, my lord, and I
wish it happily effected.

LAFEW  His Highness comes post from Marseilles, of
as able body as when he numbered thirty. He will
be here tomorrow, or I am deceived by him that in
such intelligence hath seldom failed.

COUNTESS  It rejoices me that, I hope, I shall see him
ere I die. I have letters that my son will be here
tonight. I shall beseech your Lordship to remain
with me till they meet together.

LAFEW  Madam, I was thinking with what manners I
might safely be admitted.

COUNTESS  You need but plead your honorable
privilege.

LAFEW  Lady, of that I have made a bold charter. But I
thank my God it holds yet.

[Enter Fool.]


FOOL  O madam, yonder's my lord your son with a
patch of velvet on 's face. Whether there be a scar
under 't or no, the velvet knows, but 'tis a goodly
patch of velvet. His left cheek is a cheek of two pile
and a half, but his right cheek is worn bare.

LAFEW  A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good liv'ry
of honor. So belike is that.

FOOL  But it is your carbonadoed face.

LAFEW  Let us go see your son, I pray you. I long to talk
with the young noble soldier.

FOOL  'Faith, there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine
hats, and most courteous feathers which bow the
head and nod at every man.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Helen, Widow, and Diana, with two Attendants.]


HELEN
But this exceeding posting day and night
Must wear your spirits low. We cannot help it.
But since you have made the days and nights as one
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital
As nothing can unroot you.

[Enter a Gentleman, a gentle Astringer.]

In happy time!
This man may help me to his Majesty's ear,
If he would spend his power.--God save you, sir.

GENTLEMAN  And you.

HELEN
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.

GENTLEMAN  I have been sometimes there.

HELEN
I do presume, sir, that you are not fall'n
From the report that goes upon your goodness,
And therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
I shall continue thankful.

GENTLEMAN  What's your will?

HELEN, [taking out a paper]  That it will please you
To give this poor petition to the King
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence.

GENTLEMAN
The King's not here.

HELEN  Not here, sir?

GENTLEMAN  Not indeed.
He hence removed last night, and with more haste
Than is his use.

WIDOW  Lord, how we lose our pains!

HELEN  All's well that ends well yet,
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.--
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?

GENTLEMAN
Marry, as I take it, to Rossillion,
Whither I am going.

HELEN, [giving him the paper]  I do beseech you, sir,
Since you are like to see the King before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make us means.

GENTLEMAN  This I'll do for you.

HELEN
And you shall find yourself to be well thanked
Whate'er falls more. We must to horse again.--
Go, go, provide.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Fool and Parolles.]


PAROLLES, [holding out a paper]  Good Monsieur
Lavatch, give my lord Lafew this letter. I have ere
now, sir, been better known to you, when I have
held familiarity with fresher clothes. But I am
now, sir, muddied in Fortune's mood, and smell
somewhat strong of her strong displeasure.

FOOL  Truly, Fortune's displeasure is but sluttish if it
smell so strongly as thou speak'st of. I will henceforth
eat no fish of Fortune's butt'ring. Prithee,
allow the wind.

PAROLLES  Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir. I
spake but by a metaphor.

FOOL  Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink I will stop my
nose, or against any man's metaphor. Prithee, get
thee further.

PAROLLES  Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.

FOOL  Foh! Prithee, stand away. A paper from Fortune's
close-stool, to give to a nobleman!

[Enter Lafew.]

Look, here he comes himself.--Here is a purr of
Fortune's, sir, or of Fortune's cat--but not a
musk-cat--that has fall'n into the unclean fishpond
of her displeasure and, as he says, is muddied
withal. Pray you, sir, use the carp as you may,
for he looks like a poor, decayed, ingenious, foolish,
rascally knave. I do pity his distress in my
smiles of comfort, and leave him to your Lordship.
[He exits.]

PAROLLES  My lord, I am a man whom Fortune hath
cruelly scratched.

LAFEW  And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too
late to pare her nails now. Wherein have you
played the knave with Fortune that she should
scratch you, who of herself is a good lady and
would not have knaves thrive long under her?
There's a cardecu for you. Let the justices make
you and Fortune friends. I am for other business.

PAROLLES  I beseech your Honor to hear me one single
word.

LAFEW  You beg a single penny more. Come, you shall
ha 't. Save your word.

PAROLLES  My name, my good lord, is Parolles.

LAFEW  You beg more than a word, then. Cock's my
passion; give me your hand. How does your drum?

PAROLLES  O my good lord, you were the first that
found me.

LAFEW  Was I, in sooth? And I was the first that lost
thee.

PAROLLES  It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some
grace, for you did bring me out.

LAFEW  Out upon thee, knave! Dost thou put upon me
at once both the office of God and the devil? One
brings thee in grace, and the other brings thee out.
[Trumpets sound.] The King's coming. I know by
his trumpets. Sirrah, inquire further after me. I
had talk of you last night. Though you are a fool
and a knave, you shall eat. Go to, follow.

PAROLLES  I praise God for you.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Flourish. Enter King, Countess, Lafew, the two French
Lords, with Attendants.]


KING
We lost a jewel of her, and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it. But your son,
As mad in folly, lacked the sense to know
Her estimation home.

COUNTESS  'Tis past, my liege,
And I beseech your Majesty to make it
Natural rebellion done i' th' blade of youth,
When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
O'erbears it and burns on.

KING  My honored lady,
I have forgiven and forgotten all,
Though my revenges were high bent upon him
And watched the time to shoot.

LAFEW  This I must say--
But first I beg my pardon: the young lord
Did to his Majesty, his mother, and his lady
Offense of mighty note, but to himself
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive,
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorned to serve
Humbly called mistress.

KING  Praising what is lost
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither.
We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition. Let him not ask our pardon.
The nature of his great offense is dead,
And deeper than oblivion we do bury
Th' incensing relics of it. Let him approach
A stranger, no offender, and inform him
So 'tis our will he should.

GENTLEMAN  I shall, my liege.	[He exits.]

KING
What says he to your daughter? Have you spoke?

LAFEW
All that he is hath reference to your Highness.

KING
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me
That sets him high in fame.

[Enter Count Bertram.]


LAFEW  He looks well on 't.

KING  I am not a day of season,
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
In me at once. But to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way. So stand thou forth.
The time is fair again.

BERTRAM  My high-repented blames,
Dear sovereign, pardon to me.

KING  All is whole.
Not one word more of the consumed time.
Let's take the instant by the forward top,
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
Th' inaudible and noiseless foot of time
Steals ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this lord?

BERTRAM  Admiringly, my liege. At first
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue;
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warped the line of every other favor,
Scorned a fair color or expressed it stol'n,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came
That she whom all men praised and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.

KING  Well excused.
That thou didst love her strikes some scores away
From the great compt. But love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
To the great sender turns a sour offense,
Crying "That's good that's gone!" Our rash faults
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them until we know their grave.
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
Destroy our friends and after weep their dust.
Our own love, waking, cries to see what's done,
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin.
The main consents are had, and here we'll stay
To see our widower's second marriage day.

COUNTESS
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless,
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!

LAFEW
Come on, my son, in whom my house's name
Must be digested, give a favor from you
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
That she may quickly come.
[Bertram gives him a ring.]
By my old beard
And ev'ry hair that's on 't, Helen that's dead
Was a sweet creature. Such a ring as this,
The last that e'er I took her leave at court,
I saw upon her finger.

BERTRAM  Hers it was not.

KING
Now, pray you, let me see it, for mine eye,
While I was speaking, oft was fastened to 't.
[Lafew passes the ring to the King.]
This ring was mine, and when I gave it Helen,
I bade her if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. [To Bertram.] Had you that craft to
reave her
Of what should stead her most?

BERTRAM  My gracious
sovereign,
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.

COUNTESS  Son, on my life,
I have seen her wear it, and she reckoned it
At her life's rate.

LAFEW  I am sure I saw her wear it.

BERTRAM
You are deceived, my lord. She never saw it.
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapped in a paper which contained the name
Of her that threw it. Noble she was, and thought
I stood ungaged, but when I had subscribed
To mine own fortune and informed her fully
I could not answer in that course of honor
As she had made the overture, she ceased
In heavy satisfaction and would never
Receive the ring again.

KING  Plutus himself,
That knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine,
Hath not in nature's mystery more science
Than I have in this ring. 'Twas mine, 'twas Helen's,
Whoever gave it you. Then if you know
That you are well acquainted with yourself,
Confess 'twas hers and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She called the saints to surety
That she would never put it from her finger
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
Where you have never come, or sent it us
Upon her great disaster.

BERTRAM  She never saw it.

KING
Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honor,
And mak'st conjectural fears to come into me
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
That thou art so inhuman--'twill not prove so,
And yet I know not. Thou didst hate her deadly,
And she is dead, which nothing but to close
Her eyes myself could win me to believe
More than to see this ring.--Take him away.
My forepast proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly feared too little. Away with him.
We'll sift this matter further.

BERTRAM  If you shall prove
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where yet she never was.	[He exits, under guard.]

KING
I am wrapped in dismal thinkings.

[Enter a Gentleman.]


GENTLEMAN  Gracious sovereign,
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not.
[He gives the King a paper.]
Here's a petition from a Florentine
Who hath for four or five removes come short
To tender it herself. I undertook it,
Vanquished thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who, by this, I know
Is here attending. Her business looks in her
With an importing visage, and she told me,
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Your Highness with herself.

KING [reads]  Upon his many protestations to marry me
when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won
me. Now is the Count Rossillion a widower, his
vows are forfeited to me and my honor's paid to him.
He stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow
him to his country for justice. Grant it me, O king.
In you it best lies. Otherwise a seducer flourishes,
and a poor maid is undone.
Diana Capilet.

LAFEW  I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for
this. I'll none of him.

KING
The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafew,
To bring forth this discov'ry.--Seek these suitors.
Go speedily, and bring again the Count.
[Gentleman and Attendants exit.]
I am afeard the life of Helen, lady,
Was foully snatched.

COUNTESS  Now justice on the doers!

[Enter Bertram under guard.]


KING
I wonder, sir, since wives are monsters to you
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
Yet you desire to marry.

[Enter Widow and Diana.]

What woman's that?

DIANA
I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
Derived from the ancient Capilet.
My suit, as I do understand, you know
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.

WIDOW
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honor
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease without your remedy.

KING
Come hither, count. Do you know these women?

BERTRAM
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them. Do they charge me further?

DIANA
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?

BERTRAM
She's none of mine, my lord.

DIANA  If you shall marry,
You give away this hand, and that is mine;
You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine;
You give away myself, which is known mine,
For I by vow am so embodied yours
That she which marries you must marry me,
Either both or none.

LAFEW, [to Bertram]  Your reputation comes too short
for my daughter. You are no husband for her.

BERTRAM, [to the King]
My lord, this is a fond and desp'rate creature
Whom sometime I have laughed with. Let your
Highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honor
Than for to think that I would sink it here.

KING
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
Till your deeds gain them. Fairer prove your honor
Than in my thought it lies.

DIANA  Good my lord,
Ask him upon his oath if he does think
He had not my virginity.

KING
What sayst thou to her?

BERTRAM  She's impudent, my lord,
And was a common gamester to the camp.

DIANA
He does me wrong, my lord. If I were so,
He might have bought me at a common price.
Do not believe him. O, behold this ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel. Yet for all that
He gave it to a commoner o' th' camp,
If I be one.

COUNTESS  He blushes, and 'tis hit.
Of six preceding ancestors that gem,
Conferred by testament to th' sequent issue,
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife.
That ring's a thousand proofs.

KING, [to Diana]  Methought you said
You saw one here in court could witness it.

DIANA
I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument. His name's Parolles.

LAFEW
I saw the man today, if man he be.

KING
Find him, and bring him hither.	[Attendant exits.]

BERTRAM  What of him?
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots o' th' world taxed and debauched,
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter,
That will speak anything?

KING  She hath that ring of yours.

BERTRAM
I think she has. Certain it is I liked her
And boarded her i' th' wanton way of youth.
She knew her distance and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancy's course
Are motives of more fancy; and in fine
Her infinite cunning with her modern grace
Subdued me to her rate. She got the ring,
And I had that which any inferior might
At market price have bought.

DIANA  I must be patient.
You that have turned off a first so noble wife
May justly diet me. I pray you yet--
Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband--
Send for your ring. I will return it home,
And give me mine again.

BERTRAM  I have it not.

KING, [to Diana]  What ring was yours, I pray you?

DIANA
Sir, much like the same upon your finger.

KING
Know you this ring? This ring was his of late.

DIANA
And this was it I gave him, being abed.

KING
The story, then, goes false you threw it him
Out of a casement?

DIANA  I have spoke the truth.

[Enter Parolles.]


BERTRAM
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.

KING
You boggle shrewdly. Every feather starts you.--
Is this the man you speak of?

DIANA  Ay, my lord.

KING
Tell me, sirrah--but tell me true, I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
Which, on your just proceeding, I'll keep off--
By him and by this woman here what know you?

PAROLLES  So please your Majesty, my master hath
been an honorable gentleman. Tricks he hath had
in him which gentlemen have.

KING  Come, come, to th' purpose. Did he love this
woman?

PAROLLES  Faith, sir, he did love her, but how?

KING  How, I pray you?

PAROLLES  He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a
woman.

KING  How is that?

PAROLLES  He loved her, sir, and loved her not.

KING  As thou art a knave and no knave. What an
equivocal companion is this!

PAROLLES  I am a poor man, and at your Majesty's
command.

LAFEW  He's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty
orator.

DIANA  Do you know he promised me marriage?

PAROLLES  Faith, I know more than I'll speak.

KING  But wilt thou not speak all thou know'st?

PAROLLES  Yes, so please your Majesty. I did go
between them, as I said; but more than that he
loved her, for indeed he was mad for her, and
talked of Satan and of limbo and of furies and I
know not what. Yet I was in that credit with them
at that time, that I knew of their going to bed and
of other motions, as promising her marriage, and
things which would derive me ill will to speak of.
Therefore I will not speak what I know.

KING  Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst
say they are married. But thou art too fine in thy
evidence. Therefore stand aside.
[To Diana.]
This ring you say was yours?

DIANA  Ay, my good lord.

KING
Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?

DIANA
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.

KING
Who lent it you?

DIANA  It was not lent me neither.

KING
Where did you find it then?

DIANA  I found it not.

KING
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?

DIANA  I never gave it him.

LAFEW  This woman's an easy glove, my lord; she goes
off and on at pleasure.

KING
This ring was mine. I gave it his first wife.

DIANA
It might be yours or hers for aught I know.

KING, [to Attendants]
Take her away. I do not like her now.
To prison with her, and away with him.--
Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring,
Thou diest within this hour.

DIANA  I'll never tell you.

KING
Take her away.

DIANA  I'll put in bail, my liege.

KING
I think thee now some common customer.

DIANA, [to Bertram]
By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you.

KING
Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while?

DIANA
Because he's guilty and he is not guilty.
He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to 't.
I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.
Great king, I am no strumpet. By my life,
I am either maid or else this old man's wife.

KING
She does abuse our ears. To prison with her.

DIANA
Good mother, fetch my bail. [Widow exits.] Stay,
royal sir.
The jeweler that owes the ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this lord
Who hath abused me as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harmed me, here I quit him.
He knows himself my bed he hath defiled,
And at that time he got his wife with child.
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick.
So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick.
And now behold the meaning.

[Enter Helen and Widow.]


KING  Is there no exorcist
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
Is 't real that I see?

HELEN  No, my good lord,
'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
The name and not the thing.

BERTRAM  Both, both. O, pardon!

HELEN
O, my good lord, when I was like this maid,
I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring,
And, look you, here's your letter. [She takes out a
paper.] This it says:
When from my finger you can get this ring
And are by me with child, etc. This is done.
Will you be mine now you are doubly won?

BERTRAM
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.

HELEN
If it appear not plain and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you.--
O my dear mother, do I see you living?

LAFEW
Mine eyes smell onions. I shall weep anon.--
[To Parolles.] Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher.
So, I thank thee. Wait on me home.
I'll make sport with thee. Let thy courtesies alone.
They are scurvy ones.

KING
Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
[To Diana.] If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower.
For I can guess that by thy honest aid
Thou kept'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
Of that and all the progress more and less,
Resolvedly more leisure shall express.
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet,
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
[Flourish.]

EPILOGUE
========

The King's a beggar, now the play is done.
All is well ended if this suit be won,
That you express content, which we will pay,
With strift to please you, day exceeding day.
Ours be your patience, then, and yours our parts.
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.
[All exit.]



As You Like It
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/as-you-like-it/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
ORLANDO, youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys
OLIVER, his elder brother
SECOND BROTHER, brother to Orlando and Oliver, named Jaques
ADAM, servant to Oliver and friend to Orlando
DENNIS, servant to Oliver
ROSALIND, daughter to Duke Senior
CELIA, Rosalind's cousin, daughter to Duke Frederick
TOUCHSTONE, a court Fool
DUKE FREDERICK, the usurping duke
CHARLES, wrestler at Duke Frederick's court
LE BEAU, a courtier at Duke Frederick's court
Attending Duke Frederick:
  FIRST LORD
  SECOND LORD
DUKE SENIOR, the exiled duke, brother to Duke Frederick
Lords attending Duke Senior in exile:
  JAQUES
  AMIENS
  FIRST LORD
  SECOND LORD
Attending Duke Senior in exile:
  FIRST PAGE
  SECOND PAGE
CORIN, a shepherd
SILVIUS, a young shepherd in love
PHOEBE, a disdainful shepherdess
AUDREY, a goat-keeper
WILLIAM, a country youth in love with Audrey
SIR OLIVER MARTEXT, a parish priest
HYMEN, god of marriage
Lords, Attendants, Musicians


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Orlando and Adam.]


ORLANDO  As I remember, Adam, it was upon this
fashion bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand
crowns, and, as thou sayst, charged my brother on
his blessing to breed me well. And there begins my
sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and
report speaks goldenly of his profit. For my part, he
keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more
properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you
that "keeping," for a gentleman of my birth, that
differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses are
bred better, for, besides that they are fair with their
feeding, they are taught their manage and, to that
end, riders dearly hired. But I, his brother, gain
nothing under him but growth, for the which his
animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him
as I. Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives
me, the something that nature gave me his countenance
seems to take from me. He lets me feed with
his hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and, as
much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my
education. This is it, Adam, that grieves me, and the
spirit of my father, which I think is within me,
begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no
longer endure it, though yet I know no wise remedy
how to avoid it.

[Enter Oliver.]


ADAM  Yonder comes my master, your brother.

ORLANDO  Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he
will shake me up.	[Adam steps aside.]

OLIVER  Now, sir, what make you here?

ORLANDO  Nothing. I am not taught to make anything.

OLIVER  What mar you then, sir?

ORLANDO  Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that
which God made, a poor unworthy brother of
yours, with idleness.

OLIVER  Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught
awhile.

ORLANDO  Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with
them? What prodigal portion have I spent that I
should come to such penury?

OLIVER  Know you where you are, sir?

ORLANDO  O, sir, very well: here in your orchard.

OLIVER  Know you before whom, sir?

ORLANDO  Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I
know you are my eldest brother, and in the gentle
condition of blood you should so know me. The
courtesy of nations allows you my better in that you
are the first-born, but the same tradition takes not
away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt
us. I have as much of my father in me as you, albeit I
confess your coming before me is nearer to his
reverence.

OLIVER, [threatening Orlando]  What, boy!

ORLANDO, [holding off Oliver by the throat]  Come,
come, elder brother, you are too young in this.

OLIVER  Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?

ORLANDO  I am no villain. I am the youngest son of Sir
Rowland de Boys. He was my father, and he is
thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains.
Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this
hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out
thy tongue for saying so. Thou hast railed on thyself.

ADAM, [coming forward]  Sweet masters, be patient. For
your father's remembrance, be at accord.

OLIVER, [to Orlando]  Let me go, I say.

ORLANDO  I will not till I please. You shall hear me. My
father charged you in his will to give me good
education. You have trained me like a peasant,
obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike
qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in
me, and I will no longer endure it. Therefore allow
me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or
give me the poor allottery my father left me by
testament. With that I will go buy my fortunes.
[Orlando releases Oliver.]

OLIVER  And what wilt thou do--beg when that is
spent? Well, sir, get you in. I will not long be
troubled with you. You shall have some part of your
will. I pray you leave me.

ORLANDO  I will no further offend you than becomes
me for my good.

OLIVER, [to Adam]  Get you with him, you old dog.

ADAM  Is "old dog" my reward? Most true, I have lost
my teeth in your service. God be with my old
master. He would not have spoke such a word.
[Orlando and Adam exit.]

OLIVER  Is it even so? Begin you to grow upon me? I
will physic your rankness, and yet give no thousand
crowns neither.--Holla, Dennis!

[Enter Dennis.]


DENNIS  Calls your Worship?

OLIVER  Was not Charles, the Duke's wrestler, here to
speak with me?

DENNIS  So please you, he is here at the door and
importunes access to you.

OLIVER  Call him in. [Dennis exits.] 'Twill be a good
way, and tomorrow the wrestling is.

[Enter Charles.]


CHARLES  Good morrow to your Worship.

OLIVER  Good Monsieur Charles, what's the new news
at the new court?

CHARLES  There's no news at the court, sir, but the old
news. That is, the old duke is banished by his
younger brother the new duke, and three or four
loving lords have put themselves into voluntary
exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich
the new duke. Therefore he gives them good leave
to wander.

OLIVER  Can you tell if Rosalind, the Duke's daughter,
be banished with her father?

CHARLES  O, no, for the Duke's daughter her cousin so
loves her, being ever from their cradles bred together,
that she would have followed her exile or have
died to stay behind her. She is at the court and no
less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter,
and never two ladies loved as they do.

OLIVER  Where will the old duke live?

CHARLES  They say he is already in the Forest of Arden,
and a many merry men with him; and there they
live like the old Robin Hood of England. They say
many young gentlemen flock to him every day and
fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden
world.

OLIVER  What, you wrestle tomorrow before the new
duke?

CHARLES  Marry, do I, sir, and I came to acquaint you
with a matter. I am given, sir, secretly to understand
that your younger brother Orlando hath a
disposition to come in disguised against me to try a
fall. Tomorrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit, and he
that escapes me without some broken limb shall
acquit him well. Your brother is but young and
tender, and for your love I would be loath to foil
him, as I must for my own honor if he come in.
Therefore, out of my love to you, I came hither to
acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him
from his intendment, or brook such disgrace well
as he shall run into, in that it is a thing of his own
search and altogether against my will.

OLIVER  Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which
thou shalt find I will most kindly requite. I had
myself notice of my brother's purpose herein, and
have by underhand means labored to dissuade him
from it; but he is resolute. I'll tell thee, Charles, it is
the stubbornest young fellow of France, full of
ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good
parts, a secret and villainous contriver against me
his natural brother. Therefore use thy discretion. I
had as lief thou didst break his neck as his finger.
And thou wert best look to 't, for if thou dost him
any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily grace
himself on thee, he will practice against thee by
poison, entrap thee by some treacherous device,
and never leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by
some indirect means or other. For I assure thee--
and almost with tears I speak it--there is not one so
young and so villainous this day living. I speak but
brotherly of him, but should I anatomize him to
thee as he is, I must blush and weep, and thou must
look pale and wonder.

CHARLES  I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he
come tomorrow, I'll give him his payment. If ever
he go alone again, I'll never wrestle for prize more.
And so God keep your Worship.

OLIVER  Farewell, good Charles.	[Charles exits.]
Now will I stir this gamester. I hope I shall see an
end of him, for my soul--yet I know not why--
hates nothing more than he. Yet he's gentle, never
schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of all
sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in
the heart of the world, and especially of my own
people, who best know him, that I am altogether
misprized. But it shall not be so long; this wrestler
shall clear all. Nothing remains but that I kindle the
boy thither, which now I'll go about.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Rosalind and Celia.]


CELIA  I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.

ROSALIND  Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am
mistress of, and would you yet I were merrier?
Unless you could teach me to forget a banished
father, you must not learn me how to remember
any extraordinary pleasure.

CELIA  Herein I see thou lov'st me not with the full
weight that I love thee. If my uncle, thy banished
father, had banished thy uncle, the Duke my father,
so thou hadst been still with me, I could have taught
my love to take thy father for mine. So wouldst thou,
if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously
tempered as mine is to thee.

ROSALIND  Well, I will forget the condition of my estate
to rejoice in yours.

CELIA  You know my father hath no child but I, nor
none is like to have; and truly, when he dies, thou
shalt be his heir, for what he hath taken away from
thy father perforce, I will render thee again in
affection. By mine honor I will, and when I break
that oath, let me turn monster. Therefore, my sweet
Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.

ROSALIND  From henceforth I will, coz, and devise
sports. Let me see--what think you of falling in
love?

CELIA  Marry, I prithee do, to make sport withal; but
love no man in good earnest, nor no further in
sport neither than with safety of a pure blush thou
mayst in honor come off again.

ROSALIND  What shall be our sport, then?

CELIA  Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune
from her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be
bestowed equally.

ROSALIND  I would we could do so, for her benefits are
mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman
doth most mistake in her gifts to women.

CELIA  'Tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce
makes honest, and those that she makes honest she
makes very ill-favoredly.

ROSALIND  Nay, now thou goest from Fortune's office to
Nature's. Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in
the lineaments of nature.

CELIA  No? When Nature hath made a fair creature,
may she not by fortune fall into the fire?

[Enter Touchstone.]

Though Nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune,
hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the
argument?

ROSALIND  Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature,
when Fortune makes Nature's natural the
cutter-off of Nature's wit.

CELIA  Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither,
but Nature's, who perceiveth our natural wits too
dull to reason of such goddesses, and hath sent
this natural for our whetstone, for always the dullness
of the fool is the whetstone of the wits. [To
Touchstone.] How now, wit, whither wander you?

TOUCHSTONE  Mistress, you must come away to your
father.

CELIA  Were you made the messenger?

TOUCHSTONE  No, by mine honor, but I was bid to come
for you.

ROSALIND  Where learned you that oath, fool?

TOUCHSTONE  Of a certain knight that swore by his
honor they were good pancakes, and swore by his
honor the mustard was naught. Now, I'll stand to it,
the pancakes were naught and the mustard was
good, and yet was not the knight forsworn.

CELIA  How prove you that in the great heap of your
knowledge?

ROSALIND  Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.

TOUCHSTONE  Stand you both forth now: stroke your
chins, and swear by your beards that I am a knave.

CELIA  By our beards (if we had them), thou art.

TOUCHSTONE  By my knavery (if I had it), then I were.
But if you swear by that that is not, you are not
forsworn. No more was this knight swearing by his
honor, for he never had any, or if he had, he had
sworn it away before ever he saw those pancakes or
that mustard.

CELIA  Prithee, who is 't that thou mean'st?

TOUCHSTONE  One that old Frederick, your father, loves.

CELIA  My father's love is enough to honor him.
Enough. Speak no more of him; you'll be whipped
for taxation one of these days.

TOUCHSTONE  The more pity that fools may not speak
wisely what wise men do foolishly.

CELIA  By my troth, thou sayest true. For, since the little
wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery
that wise men have makes a great show. Here
comes Monsieur Le Beau.

[Enter Le Beau.]


ROSALIND  With his mouth full of news.

CELIA  Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their
young.

ROSALIND  Then shall we be news-crammed.

CELIA  All the better. We shall be the more
marketable.--Bonjour, Monsieur Le Beau. What's
the news?

LE BEAU  Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.

CELIA  Sport? Of what color?

LE BEAU  What color, madam? How shall I answer you?

ROSALIND  As wit and fortune will.

TOUCHSTONE  Or as the destinies decrees.

CELIA  Well said. That was laid on with a trowel.

TOUCHSTONE  Nay, if I keep not my rank--

ROSALIND  Thou losest thy old smell.

LE BEAU  You amaze me, ladies. I would have told you of
good wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.

ROSALIND  Yet tell us the manner of the wrestling.

LE BEAU  I will tell you the beginning, and if it please
your Ladyships, you may see the end, for the best is
yet to do, and here, where you are, they are coming
to perform it.

CELIA  Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.

LE BEAU  There comes an old man and his three sons--

CELIA  I could match this beginning with an old tale.

LE BEAU  Three proper young men of excellent growth
and presence.

ROSALIND  With bills on their necks: "Be it known unto
all men by these presents."

LE BEAU  The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles,
the Duke's wrestler, which Charles in a moment
threw him and broke three of his ribs, that there is
little hope of life in him. So he served the second,
and so the third. Yonder they lie, the poor old man
their father making such pitiful dole over them that
all the beholders take his part with weeping.

ROSALIND  Alas!

TOUCHSTONE  But what is the sport, monsieur, that the
ladies have lost?

LE BEAU  Why, this that I speak of.

TOUCHSTONE  Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is
the first time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was
sport for ladies.

CELIA  Or I, I promise thee.

ROSALIND  But is there any else longs to see this broken
music in his sides? Is there yet another dotes upon
rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling, cousin?

LE BEAU  You must if you stay here, for here is the place
appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to
perform it.

CELIA  Yonder sure they are coming. Let us now stay
and see it.

[Flourish. Enter Duke Frederick, Lords, Orlando,
Charles, and Attendants.]


DUKE FREDERICK  Come on. Since the youth will not be
entreated, his own peril on his forwardness.

ROSALIND, [to Le Beau]  Is yonder the man?

LE BEAU  Even he, madam.

CELIA  Alas, he is too young. Yet he looks successfully.

DUKE FREDERICK  How now, daughter and cousin? Are
you crept hither to see the wrestling?

ROSALIND  Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.

DUKE FREDERICK  You will take little delight in it, I can
tell you, there is such odds in the man. In pity of the
challenger's youth, I would fain dissuade him, but
he will not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies; see if
you can move him.

CELIA  Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.

DUKE FREDERICK  Do so. I'll not be by.
[He steps aside.]

LE BEAU, [to Orlando]  Monsieur the challenger, the
Princess calls for you.

ORLANDO  I attend them with all respect and duty.

ROSALIND  Young man, have you challenged Charles the
wrestler?

ORLANDO  No, fair princess. He is the general challenger.
I come but in as others do, to try with him the
strength of my youth.

CELIA  Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for
your years. You have seen cruel proof of this man's
strength. If you saw yourself with your eyes or knew
yourself with your judgment, the fear of your adventure
would counsel you to a more equal enterprise.
We pray you for your own sake to embrace your
own safety and give over this attempt.

ROSALIND  Do, young sir. Your reputation shall not
therefore be misprized. We will make it our suit to
the Duke that the wrestling might not go forward.

ORLANDO  I beseech you, punish me not with your hard
thoughts, wherein I confess me much guilty to deny
so fair and excellent ladies anything. But let your
fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial,
wherein, if I be foiled, there is but one shamed that
was never gracious; if killed, but one dead that is
willing to be so. I shall do my friends no wrong, for
I have none to lament me; the world no injury, for
in it I have nothing. Only in the world I fill up a
place which may be better supplied when I have
made it empty.

ROSALIND  The little strength that I have, I would it
were with you.

CELIA  And mine, to eke out hers.

ROSALIND  Fare you well. Pray heaven I be deceived in
you.

CELIA  Your heart's desires be with you.

CHARLES  Come, where is this young gallant that is so
desirous to lie with his mother Earth?

ORLANDO  Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more
modest working.

DUKE FREDERICK, [coming forward]  You shall try but
one fall.

CHARLES  No, I warrant your Grace you shall not entreat
him to a second, that have so mightily persuaded
him from a first.

ORLANDO  You mean to mock me after, you should not
have mocked me before. But come your ways.

ROSALIND  Now Hercules be thy speed, young man!

CELIA  I would I were invisible, to catch the strong
fellow by the leg.
[Orlando and Charles wrestle.]

ROSALIND  O excellent young man!

CELIA  If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who
should down.
[Orlando throws Charles. Shout.]

DUKE FREDERICK  No more, no more.

ORLANDO  Yes, I beseech your Grace. I am not yet well
breathed.

DUKE FREDERICK  How dost thou, Charles?

LE BEAU  He cannot speak, my lord.

DUKE FREDERICK  Bear him away.
[Charles is carried off by Attendants.]
What is thy name, young man?

ORLANDO  Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir
Rowland de Boys.

DUKE FREDERICK
I would thou hadst been son to some man else.
The world esteemed thy father honorable,
But I did find him still mine enemy.
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this
deed
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well. Thou art a gallant youth.
I would thou hadst told me of another father.
[Duke exits with Touchstone, Le Beau,
Lords, and Attendants.]

CELIA, [to Rosalind]
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?

ORLANDO
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Frederick.

ROSALIND, [to Celia]
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
And all the world was of my father's mind.
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties
Ere he should thus have ventured.

CELIA  Gentle cousin,
Let us go thank him and encourage him.
My father's rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart.--Sir, you have well deserved.
If you do keep your promises in love
But justly, as you have exceeded all promise,
Your mistress shall be happy.

ROSALIND, [giving Orlando a chain from her neck]
Gentleman,
Wear this for me--one out of suits with Fortune,
That could give more but that her hand lacks
means.--
Shall we go, coz?

CELIA  Ay.--Fare you well, fair gentleman.

ORLANDO, [aside]
Can I not say "I thank you"? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.

ROSALIND, [to Celia]
He calls us back. My pride fell with my fortunes.
I'll ask him what he would.--Did you call, sir?
Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown
More than your enemies.

CELIA  Will you go, coz?

ROSALIND  Have with you. [To Orlando.] Fare you well.
[Rosalind and Celia exit.]

ORLANDO
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando! Thou art overthrown.
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

[Enter Le Beau.]


LE BEAU
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love,
Yet such is now the Duke's condition
That he misconsters all that you have done.
The Duke is humorous. What he is indeed
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.

ORLANDO
I thank you, sir, and pray you tell me this:
Which of the two was daughter of the duke
That here was at the wrestling?

LE BEAU
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the smaller is his daughter.
The other is daughter to the banished duke,
And here detained by her usurping uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
But I can tell you that of late this duke
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
Grounded upon no other argument
But that the people praise her for her virtues
And pity her for her good father's sake;
And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well.
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.

ORLANDO
I rest much bounden to you. Fare you well.
[Le Beau exits.]
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother.
But heavenly Rosalind!
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Celia and Rosalind.]


CELIA  Why, cousin! Why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy,
not a word?

ROSALIND  Not one to throw at a dog.

CELIA  No, thy words are too precious to be cast away
upon curs. Throw some of them at me. Come, lame
me with reasons.

ROSALIND  Then there were two cousins laid up, when
the one should be lamed with reasons, and the
other mad without any.

CELIA  But is all this for your father?

ROSALIND  No, some of it is for my child's father. O,
how full of briers is this working-day world!

CELIA  They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in
holiday foolery. If we walk not in the trodden paths,
our very petticoats will catch them.

ROSALIND  I could shake them off my coat. These burs
are in my heart.

CELIA  Hem them away.

ROSALIND  I would try, if I could cry "hem" and have
him.

CELIA  Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.

ROSALIND  O, they take the part of a better wrestler
than myself.

CELIA  O, a good wish upon you. You will try in time, in
despite of a fall. But turning these jests out of
service, let us talk in good earnest. Is it possible on
such a sudden you should fall into so strong a liking
with old Sir Rowland's youngest son?

ROSALIND  The Duke my father loved his father dearly.

CELIA  Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his
son dearly? By this kind of chase I should hate him,
for my father hated his father dearly. Yet I hate not
Orlando.

ROSALIND  No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.

CELIA  Why should I not? Doth he not deserve well?

ROSALIND  Let me love him for that, and do you love
him because I do.

[Enter Duke Frederick with Lords.]

Look, here comes the Duke.

CELIA  With his eyes full of anger.

DUKE FREDERICK, [to Rosalind]
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our court.

ROSALIND  Me, uncle?

DUKE FREDERICK  You, cousin.
Within these ten days if that thou beest found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.

ROSALIND  I do beseech your Grace,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.
If with myself I hold intelligence
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream or be not frantic--
As I do trust I am not--then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
Did I offend your Highness.

DUKE FREDERICK  Thus do all traitors.
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself.
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.

ROSALIND
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.

DUKE FREDERICK
Thou art thy father's daughter. There's enough.

ROSALIND
So was I when your Highness took his dukedom.
So was I when your Highness banished him.
Treason is not inherited, my lord,
Or if we did derive it from our friends,
What's that to me? My father was no traitor.
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.

CELIA  Dear sovereign, hear me speak.

DUKE FREDERICK
Ay, Celia, we stayed her for your sake;
Else had she with her father ranged along.

CELIA
I did not then entreat to have her stay.
It was your pleasure and your own remorse.
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her. If she be a traitor,
Why, so am I. We still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together,
And, wheresoe'er we went, like Juno's swans
Still we went coupled and inseparable.

DUKE FREDERICK
She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness,
Her very silence, and her patience
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more
virtuous
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips.
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have passed upon her. She is banished.

CELIA
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege.
I cannot live out of her company.

DUKE FREDERICK
You are a fool.--You, niece, provide yourself.
If you outstay the time, upon mine honor
And in the greatness of my word, you die.
[Duke and Lords exit.]

CELIA
O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.

ROSALIND  I have more cause.

CELIA  Thou hast not, cousin.
Prithee, be cheerful. Know'st thou not the Duke
Hath banished me, his daughter?

ROSALIND  That he hath not.

CELIA
No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
Shall we be sundered? Shall we part, sweet girl?
No, let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go, and what to bear with us,
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out.
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.

ROSALIND  Why, whither shall we go?

CELIA
To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.

ROSALIND
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far?
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.

CELIA
I'll put myself in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face.
The like do you. So shall we pass along
And never stir assailants.

ROSALIND  Were it not better,
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man?
A gallant curtal-ax upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand, and in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will,
We'll have a swashing and a martial outside--
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances.

CELIA
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?

ROSALIND
I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page,
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
But what will you be called?

CELIA
Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.

ROSALIND
But, cousin, what if we assayed to steal
The clownish fool out of your father's court?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel?

CELIA
He'll go along o'er the wide world with me.
Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty, and not to banishment.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Duke Senior, Amiens, and two or three Lords, like
foresters.]


DUKE SENIOR
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court?
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons' difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say
"This is no flattery. These are counselors
That feelingly persuade me what I am."
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head.
And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything.

AMIENS
I would not change it. Happy is your Grace,
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.

DUKE SENIOR
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round haunches gored.

FIRST LORD  Indeed, my lord,
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you do more usurp
Than doth your brother that hath banished you.
Today my Lord of Amiens and myself
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood;
To the which place a poor sequestered stag
That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt
Did come to languish. And indeed, my lord,
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase. And thus the hairy fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook,
Augmenting it with tears.

DUKE SENIOR  But what said Jaques?
Did he not moralize this spectacle?

FIRST LORD
O yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
"Poor deer," quoth he, "thou mak'st a testament
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too much." Then, being there
alone,
Left and abandoned of his velvet friends:
"'Tis right," quoth he. "Thus misery doth part
The flux of company." Anon a careless herd,
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never stays to greet him. "Ay," quoth Jaques,
"Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens.
'Tis just the fashion. Wherefore do you look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?"
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of country, city, court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what's worse,
To fright the animals and to kill them up
In their assigned and native dwelling place.

DUKE SENIOR
And did you leave him in this contemplation?

SECOND LORD
We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing deer.

DUKE SENIOR  Show me the place.
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he's full of matter.

FIRST LORD  I'll bring you to him straight.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Duke Frederick with Lords.]


DUKE FREDERICK
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be. Some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.

FIRST LORD
I cannot hear of any that did see her.
The ladies her attendants of her chamber
Saw her abed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.

SECOND LORD
My lord, the roinish clown at whom so oft
Your Grace was wont to laugh is also missing.
Hisperia, the Princess' gentlewoman,
Confesses that she secretly o'erheard
Your daughter and her cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the wrestler
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles,
And she believes wherever they are gone
That youth is surely in their company.

DUKE FREDERICK
Send to his brother. Fetch that gallant hither.
If he be absent, bring his brother to me.
I'll make him find him. Do this suddenly,
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.
[They exit.]

Henry V
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/henry-v/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
CHORUS
HENRY V, KING OF ENGLAND
THOMAS, DUKE OF EXETER, uncle to the King
Brothers to the King:
  HUMPHREY, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER
  JOHN, DUKE OF BEDFORD
  THOMAS, DUKE OF CLARENCE
Cousins to the King:
  DUKE OF YORK
  EARL OF WESTMORELAND
  EARL OF CAMBRIDGE
English nobles:
  EARL OF WARWICK
  EARL OF SALISBURY
  EARL OF HUNTINGTON
  LORD SCROOP OF MASHAM
SIR THOMAS GREY
HOSTESS QUICKLY
Former companions of Henry, now in his army:
  PISTOL
  NYM
  BARDOLPH
BOY, their servant
Officers in Henry's army:
  SIR THOMAS ERPINGHAM
  CAPTAIN FLUELLEN
  CAPTAIN GOWER
  CAPTAIN MACMORRIS
  CAPTAIN JAMY
English heralds
Soldiers in Henry's army:
  JOHN BATES
  ALEXANDER COURT
  MICHAEL WILLIAMS
BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
BISHOP OF ELY

KING OF FRANCE
QUEEN ISABEL OF FRANCE
KATHERINE, Princess of France
ALICE, a gentlewoman attending on Katherine
DAUPHIN (i.e., Prince) of France
French nobles:
  DUKE OF BERRI
  DUKE OF BRITTANY
  DUKE OF ORLEANS
  DUKE OF BOURBON
  DUKE OF BURGUNDY
  CONSTABLE OF FRANCE
  LORD GRANDPRE
  LORD RAMBURES
  LORD BEAUMONT
MONTJOY, French herald
French ambassadors to England
MONSIEUR LE FER, a French soldier
Governor of Harfleur
Lords, Attendants, Soldiers, French Prisoners, Messengers


PROLOGUE
========

[Enter Chorus as Prologue.]


CHORUS
O, for a muse of fire that would ascend
The brightest heaven of invention!
A kingdom for a stage, princes to act,
And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!
Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,
Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels,
Leashed in like hounds, should famine, sword, and
fire
Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all,
The flat unraised spirits that hath dared
On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth
So great an object. Can this cockpit hold
The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram
Within this wooden O the very casques
That did affright the air at Agincourt?
O pardon, since a crooked figure may
Attest in little place a million,
And let us, ciphers to this great account,
On your imaginary forces work.
Suppose within the girdle of these walls
Are now confined two mighty monarchies,
Whose high upreared and abutting fronts
The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder.
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts.
Into a thousand parts divide one man,
And make imaginary puissance.
Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them
Printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth,
For 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our
kings,
Carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,
Turning th' accomplishment of many years
Into an hourglass; for the which supply,
Admit me chorus to this history,
Who, prologue-like, your humble patience pray
Gently to hear, kindly to judge our play.
[He exits.]


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the two Bishops of Canterbury and Ely.]


BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
My lord, I'll tell you that self bill is urged
Which in th' eleventh year of the last king's reign
Was like, and had indeed against us passed
But that the scambling and unquiet time
Did push it out of farther question.

BISHOP OF ELY
But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
It must be thought on. If it pass against us,
We lose the better half of our possession,
For all the temporal lands which men devout
By testament have given to the Church
Would they strip from us, being valued thus:
"As much as would maintain, to the King's honor,
Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,
Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;
And, to relief of lazars and weak age
Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,
A hundred almshouses right well supplied;
And to the coffers of the King besides,
A thousand pounds by th' year." Thus runs the bill.

BISHOP OF ELY
This would drink deep.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY  'Twould drink the cup and
all.

BISHOP OF ELY  But what prevention?

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
The King is full of grace and fair regard.

BISHOP OF ELY
And a true lover of the holy Church.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
The courses of his youth promised it not.
The breath no sooner left his father's body
But that his wildness, mortified in him,
Seemed to die too. Yea, at that very moment
Consideration like an angel came
And whipped th' offending Adam out of him,
Leaving his body as a paradise
T' envelop and contain celestial spirits.
Never was such a sudden scholar made,
Never came reformation in a flood
With such a heady currance scouring faults,
Nor never Hydra-headed willfulness
So soon did lose his seat, and all at once,
As in this king.

BISHOP OF ELY  We are blessed in the change.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
Hear him but reason in divinity
And, all-admiring, with an inward wish
You would desire the King were made a prelate;
Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,
You would say it hath been all in all his study;
List his discourse of war, and you shall hear
A fearful battle rendered you in music;
Turn him to any cause of policy,
The Gordian knot of it he will unloose
Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,
The air, a chartered libertine, is still,
And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears
To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences;
So that the art and practic part of life
Must be the mistress to this theoric;
Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,
Since his addiction was to courses vain,
His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,
His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports,
And never noted in him any study,
Any retirement, any sequestration
From open haunts and popularity.

BISHOP OF ELY
The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best
Neighbored by fruit of baser quality;
And so the Prince obscured his contemplation
Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt,
Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,
Unseen yet crescive in his faculty.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
It must be so, for miracles are ceased,
And therefore we must needs admit the means
How things are perfected.

BISHOP OF ELY  But, my good lord,
How now for mitigation of this bill
Urged by the Commons? Doth his Majesty
Incline to it or no?

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY  He seems indifferent,
Or rather swaying more upon our part
Than cherishing th' exhibitors against us;
For I have made an offer to his Majesty--
Upon our spiritual convocation
And in regard of causes now in hand,
Which I have opened to his Grace at large,
As touching France--to give a greater sum
Than ever at one time the clergy yet
Did to his predecessors part withal.

BISHOP OF ELY
How did this offer seem received, my lord?

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
With good acceptance of his Majesty--
Save that there was not time enough to hear,
As I perceived his Grace would fain have done,
The severals and unhidden passages
Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms,
And generally to the crown and seat of France,
Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.

BISHOP OF ELY
What was th' impediment that broke this off?

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
The French ambassador upon that instant
Craved audience. And the hour, I think, is come
To give him hearing. Is it four o'clock?

BISHOP OF ELY  It is.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
Then go we in to know his embassy,
Which I could with a ready guess declare
Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.

BISHOP OF ELY
I'll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter the King of England, Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester, Bedford, Clarence, Warwick, Westmoreland,
and Exeter, with other Attendants.]


KING HENRY
Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?

EXETER
Not here in presence.

KING HENRY  Send for him, good uncle.

WESTMORELAND
Shall we call in th' Ambassador, my liege?

KING HENRY
Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved,
Before we hear him, of some things of weight
That task our thoughts concerning us and France.

[Enter the two Bishops of Canterbury and Ely.]


BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
God and his angels guard your sacred throne
And make you long become it.

KING HENRY  Sure we thank you.
My learned lord, we pray you to proceed
And justly and religiously unfold
Why the law Salic that they have in France
Or should or should not bar us in our claim.
And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,
That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your
reading,
Or nicely charge your understanding soul
With opening titles miscreate, whose right
Suits not in native colors with the truth;
For God doth know how many now in health
Shall drop their blood in approbation
Of what your reverence shall incite us to.
Therefore take heed how you impawn our person,
How you awake our sleeping sword of war.
We charge you in the name of God, take heed,
For never two such kingdoms did contend
Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops
Are every one a woe, a sore complaint
'Gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the
swords
That makes such waste in brief mortality.
Under this conjuration, speak, my lord,
For we will hear, note, and believe in heart
That what you speak is in your conscience washed
As pure as sin with baptism.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers
That owe yourselves, your lives, and services
To this imperial throne. There is no bar
To make against your Highness' claim to France
But this, which they produce from Pharamond:
"In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant
(No woman shall succeed in Salic land),
Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze
To be the realm of France, and Pharamond
The founder of this law and female bar.
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm
That the land Salic is in Germany,
Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe,
Where Charles the Great, having subdued the
Saxons,
There left behind and settled certain French,
Who, holding in disdain the German women
For some dishonest manners of their life,
Established then this law: to wit, no female
Should be inheritrix in Salic land,
Which "Salic," as I said, 'twixt Elbe and Sala
Is at this day in Germany called Meissen.
Then doth it well appear the Salic law
Was not devised for the realm of France,
Nor did the French possess the Salic land
Until four hundred one and twenty years
After defunction of King Pharamond,
Idly supposed the founder of this law,
Who died within the year of our redemption
Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great
Subdued the Saxons and did seat the French
Beyond the river Sala in the year
Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,
King Pepin, which deposed Childeric,
Did, as heir general, being descended
Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,
Make claim and title to the crown of France.
Hugh Capet also, who usurped the crown
Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir male
Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,
To find his title with some shows of truth,
Though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught,
Conveyed himself as th' heir to th' Lady Lingare,
Daughter to Charlemagne, who was the son
To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son
Of Charles the Great. Also King Lewis the Tenth,
Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,
Could not keep quiet in his conscience,
Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied
That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,
Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,
Daughter to Charles the foresaid Duke of Lorraine:
By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great
Was reunited to the crown of France.
So that, as clear as is the summer's sun,
King Pepin's title and Hugh Capet's claim,
King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear
To hold in right and title of the female.
So do the kings of France unto this day,
Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law
To bar your Highness claiming from the female,
And rather choose to hide them in a net
Than amply to imbar their crooked titles
Usurped from you and your progenitors.

KING HENRY
May I with right and conscience make this claim?

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
The sin upon my head, dread sovereign,
For in the Book of Numbers is it writ:
"When the man dies, let the inheritance
Descend unto the daughter." Gracious lord,
Stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag,
Look back into your mighty ancestors.
Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire's tomb,
From whom you claim; invoke his warlike spirit
And your great-uncle's, Edward the Black Prince,
Who on the French ground played a tragedy,
Making defeat on the full power of France
Whiles his most mighty father on a hill
Stood smiling to behold his lion's whelp
Forage in blood of French nobility.
O noble English, that could entertain
With half their forces the full pride of France
And let another half stand laughing by,
All out of work and cold for action!

BISHOP OF ELY
Awake remembrance of these valiant dead
And with your puissant arm renew their feats.
You are their heir, you sit upon their throne,
The blood and courage that renowned them
Runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege
Is in the very May-morn of his youth,
Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.

EXETER
Your brother kings and monarchs of the Earth
Do all expect that you should rouse yourself
As did the former lions of your blood.

WESTMORELAND
They know your Grace hath cause and means and
might;
So hath your Highness. Never king of England
Had nobles richer, and more loyal subjects,
Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England
And lie pavilioned in the fields of France.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
O, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,
With blood and sword and fire to win your right,
In aid whereof we of the spiritualty
Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum
As never did the clergy at one time
Bring in to any of your ancestors.

KING HENRY
We must not only arm t' invade the French,
But lay down our proportions to defend
Against the Scot, who will make road upon us
With all advantages.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
They of those marches, gracious sovereign,
Shall be a wall sufficient to defend
Our inland from the pilfering borderers.

KING HENRY
We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
But fear the main intendment of the Scot,
Who hath been still a giddy neighbor to us.
For you shall read that my great-grandfather
Never went with his forces into France
But that the Scot on his unfurnished kingdom
Came pouring like the tide into a breach
With ample and brim fullness of his force,
Galling the gleaned land with hot assays,
Girding with grievous siege castles and towns,
That England, being empty of defense,
Hath shook and trembled at th' ill neighborhood.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY
She hath been then more feared than harmed, my
liege,
For hear her but exampled by herself:
When all her chivalry hath been in France
And she a mourning widow of her nobles,
She hath herself not only well defended
But taken and impounded as a stray
The King of Scots, whom she did send to France
To fill King Edward's fame with prisoner kings
And make her chronicle as rich with praise
As is the ooze and bottom of the sea
With sunken wrack and sumless treasuries.

BISHOP OF ELY
But there's a saying very old and true:
	"If that you will France win,
	Then with Scotland first begin."
For once the eagle England being in prey,
To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot
Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs,
Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,
To 'tame and havoc more than she can eat.

EXETER
It follows, then, the cat must stay at home.
Yet that is but a crushed necessity,
Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
While that the armed hand doth fight abroad,
Th' advised head defends itself at home.
For government, though high and low and lower,
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,
Congreeing in a full and natural close,
Like music.

BISHOP OF CANTERBURY  Therefore doth heaven divide
The state of man in divers functions,
Setting endeavor in continual motion,
To which is fixed as an aim or butt
Obedience; for so work the honeybees,
Creatures that by a rule in nature teach
The act of order to a peopled kingdom.
They have a king and officers of sorts,
Where some like magistrates correct at home,
Others like merchants venture trade abroad,
Others like soldiers armed in their stings
Make boot upon the summer's velvet buds,
Which pillage they with merry march bring home
To the tent royal of their emperor,
Who, busied in his majesty, surveys
The singing masons building roofs of gold,
The civil citizens kneading up the honey,
The poor mechanic porters crowding in
Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate,
The sad-eyed justice with his surly hum
Delivering o'er to executors pale
The lazy yawning drone. I this infer:
That many things, having full reference
To one consent, may work contrariously,
As many arrows loosed several ways
Come to one mark, as many ways meet in one town,
As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea,
As many lines close in the dial's center,
So may a thousand actions, once afoot,
End in one purpose and be all well borne
Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege!
Divide your happy England into four,
Whereof take you one quarter into France,
And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.
If we, with thrice such powers left at home,
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
Let us be worried, and our nation lose
The name of hardiness and policy.

KING HENRY
Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.
[Attendants exit.]
Now are we well resolved, and by God's help
And yours, the noble sinews of our power,
France being ours, we'll bend it to our awe
Or break it all to pieces. Or there we'll sit,
Ruling in large and ample empery
O'er France and all her almost kingly dukedoms,
Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn,
Tombless, with no remembrance over them.
Either our history shall with full mouth
Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave,
Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth,
Not worshiped with a waxen epitaph.

[Enter Ambassadors of France, with Attendants.
]

Now are we well prepared to know the pleasure
Of our fair cousin Dauphin, for we hear
Your greeting is from him, not from the King.

AMBASSADOR
May 't please your Majesty to give us leave
Freely to render what we have in charge,
Or shall we sparingly show you far off
The Dauphin's meaning and our embassy?

KING HENRY
We are no tyrant, but a Christian king,
Unto whose grace our passion is as subject
As is our wretches fettered in our prisons.
Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness
Tell us the Dauphin's mind.

AMBASSADOR  Thus, then, in few:
Your Highness, lately sending into France,
Did claim some certain dukedoms in the right
Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third;
In answer of which claim, the Prince our master
Says that you savor too much of your youth
And bids you be advised there's naught in France
That can be with a nimble galliard won;
You cannot revel into dukedoms there.
He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
This tun of treasure and, in lieu of this,
Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.

KING HENRY
What treasure, uncle?

EXETER  Tennis balls,
my liege.

KING HENRY
We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us.
His present and your pains we thank you for.
When we have matched our rackets to these balls,
We will in France, by God's grace, play a set
Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard.
Tell him he hath made a match with such a
wrangler
That all the courts of France will be disturbed
With chases. And we understand him well,
How he comes o'er us with our wilder days,
Not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valued this poor seat of England,
And therefore, living hence, did give ourself
To barbarous license, as 'tis ever common
That men are merriest when they are from home.
But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state,
Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness
When I do rouse me in my throne of France,
For that I have laid by my majesty
And plodded like a man for working days;
But I will rise there with so full a glory
That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us.
And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his
Hath turned his balls to gun-stones, and his soul
Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance
That shall fly with them; for many a thousand
widows
Shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands,
Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down;
And some are yet ungotten and unborn
That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin's scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God,
To whom I do appeal, and in whose name
Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on,
To venge me as I may and to put forth
My rightful hand in a well-hallowed cause.
So get you hence in peace. And tell the Dauphin
His jest will savor but of shallow wit
When thousands weep more than did laugh at it.--
Convey them with safe conduct.--Fare you well.
[Ambassadors exit, with Attendants.]

EXETER  This was a merry message.

KING HENRY
We hope to make the sender blush at it.
Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour
That may give furth'rance to our expedition;
For we have now no thought in us but France,
Save those to God, that run before our business.
Therefore let our proportions for these wars
Be soon collected, and all things thought upon
That may with reasonable swiftness add
More feathers to our wings. For, God before,
We'll chide this Dauphin at his father's door.
Therefore let every man now task his thought,
That this fair action may on foot be brought.
[Flourish. They exit.]


ACT 2
=====


[Enter Chorus.]


CHORUS
Now all the youth of England are on fire,
And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies;
Now thrive the armorers, and honor's thought
Reigns solely in the breast of every man.
They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,
Following the mirror of all Christian kings
With winged heels, as English Mercurys.
For now sits Expectation in the air
And hides a sword, from hilts unto the point,
With crowns imperial, crowns, and coronets
Promised to Harry and his followers.
The French, advised by good intelligence
Of this most dreadful preparation,
Shake in their fear, and with pale policy
Seek to divert the English purposes.
O England, model to thy inward greatness,
Like little body with a mighty heart,
What might'st thou do, that honor would thee do,
Were all thy children kind and natural!
But see, thy fault France hath in thee found out,
A nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills
With treacherous crowns, and three corrupted men--
One, Richard, Earl of Cambridge, and the second,
Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third,
Sir Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland--
Have, for the gilt of France (O guilt indeed!),
Confirmed conspiracy with fearful France,
And by their hands this grace of kings must die,
If hell and treason hold their promises,
Ere he take ship for France, and in Southampton.
Linger your patience on, and we'll digest
Th' abuse of distance, force a play.
The sum is paid, the traitors are agreed,
The King is set from London, and the scene
Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton.
There is the playhouse now, there must you sit,
And thence to France shall we convey you safe
And bring you back, charming the narrow seas
To give you gentle pass; for, if we may,
We'll not offend one stomach with our play.
But, till the King come forth, and not till then,
Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.
[He exits.]

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Corporal Nym and Lieutenant Bardolph.]


BARDOLPH  Well met, Corporal Nym.

NYM  Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.

BARDOLPH  What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends
yet?

NYM  For my part, I care not. I say little, but when time
shall serve, there shall be smiles; but that shall be as
it may. I dare not fight, but I will wink and hold out
mine iron. It is a simple one, but what though? It
will toast cheese, and it will endure cold as another
man's sword will, and there's an end.

BARDOLPH  I will bestow a breakfast to make you
friends, and we'll be all three sworn brothers to
France. Let 't be so, good Corporal Nym.

NYM  Faith, I will live so long as I may, that's the
certain of it; and when I cannot live any longer, I
will do as I may. That is my rest, that is the
rendezvous of it.

BARDOLPH  It is certain, corporal, that he is married to
Nell Quickly, and certainly she did you wrong, for
you were troth-plight to her.

NYM  I cannot tell. Things must be as they may. Men
may sleep, and they may have their throats about
them at that time, and some say knives have edges.
It must be as it may. Though patience be a tired
mare, yet she will plod. There must be conclusions.
Well, I cannot tell.

[Enter Pistol and Hostess Quickly.]


BARDOLPH  Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife.
Good corporal, be patient here.--How now, mine
host Pistol?

PISTOL  Base tyke, call'st thou me host? Now, by this
hand, I swear I scorn the term, nor shall my Nell
keep lodgers.

HOSTESS  No, by my troth, not long; for we cannot
lodge and board a dozen or fourteen gentlewomen
that live honestly by the prick of their needles but it
will be thought we keep a bawdy house straight.
[Nym and Pistol draw their swords.]
O well-a-day, Lady! If he be not hewn now, we shall
see willful adultery and murder committed.

BARDOLPH  Good lieutenant, good corporal, offer nothing
here.

NYM  Pish!

PISTOL  Pish for thee, Iceland dog, thou prick-eared
cur of Iceland!

HOSTESS  Good Corporal Nym, show thy valor, and put
up your sword.

NYM  Will you shog off? [To Pistol.] I would have you
solus.

PISTOL  "Solus, egregious dog? O viper vile, the solus
in thy most marvelous face, the solus in thy teeth
and in thy throat and in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy
maw, perdy, and, which is worse, within thy nasty
mouth! I do retort the solus in thy bowels, for I can
take, and Pistol's cock is up, and flashing fire will
follow.

NYM  I am not Barbason, you cannot conjure me. I
have an humor to knock you indifferently well. If
you grow foul with me, Pistol, I will scour you with
my rapier, as I may, in fair terms. If you would walk
off, I would prick your guts a little in good terms, as
I may, and that's the humor of it.

PISTOL
O braggart vile and damned furious wight,
The grave doth gape, and doting death is near.
Therefore exhale.

BARDOLPH  Hear me, hear me what I say: he that strikes
the first stroke, I'll run him up to the hilts, as I am a
soldier.	[He draws.]

PISTOL  An oath of mickle might, and fury shall abate.
[Pistol and Nym and then Bardolph
sheathe their swords.]
Give me thy fist, thy forefoot to me give. Thy spirits
are most tall.

NYM, [to Pistol]  I will cut thy throat one time or other
in fair terms, that is the humor of it.

PISTOL  Couple a gorge, that is the word. I defy thee
again. O hound of Crete, think'st thou my spouse to
get? No, to the spital go, and from the powd'ring tub
of infamy fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid's kind,
Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse. I
have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly for the
only she: and pauca, there's enough too! Go to.

[Enter the Boy.]


BOY  Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master,
and your hostess. He is very sick and would to
bed.--Good Bardolph, put thy face between his
sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan. Faith,
he's very ill.

BARDOLPH  Away, you rogue!

HOSTESS  By my troth, he'll yield the crow a pudding
one of these days. The King has killed his heart.
Good husband, come home presently.
[She exits with the Boy.]

BARDOLPH  Come, shall I make you two friends? We
must to France together. Why the devil should we
keep knives to cut one another's throats?

PISTOL
Let floods o'erswell and fiends for food howl on!

NYM  You'll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at
betting?

PISTOL  Base is the slave that pays.

NYM  That now I will have, that's the humor of it.

PISTOL  As manhood shall compound. Push home.
[They draw.]

BARDOLPH, [drawing his sword]  By this sword, he that
makes the first thrust, I'll kill him. By this sword, I
will.

PISTOL, [sheathing his sword]  "Sword" is an oath, and
oaths must have their course.

BARDOLPH  Corporal Nym, an thou wilt be friends, be
friends; an thou wilt not, why then be enemies with
me too. Prithee, put up.

PISTOL, [to Nym]  A noble shalt thou have, and present
pay, and liquor likewise will I give to thee, and
friendship shall combine, and brotherhood. I'll live
by Nym, and Nym shall live by me. Is not this just?
For I shall sutler be unto the camp, and profits will
accrue. Give me thy hand.

NYM  I shall have my noble?

PISTOL  In cash, most justly paid.

NYM  Well, then, that's the humor of 't.
[Nym and Bardolph sheathe their swords.]

[Enter Hostess.]


HOSTESS  As ever you come of women, come in quickly
to Sir John. Ah, poor heart, he is so shaked of a
burning quotidian-tertian that it is most lamentable
to behold. Sweet men, come to him.

NYM  The King hath run bad humors on the knight,
that's the even of it.

PISTOL  Nym, thou hast spoke the right. His heart is
fracted and corroborate.

NYM  The King is a good king, but it must be as it may;
he passes some humors and careers.

PISTOL  Let us condole the knight, for, lambkins, we
will live.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Exeter, Bedford, and Westmoreland.]


BEDFORD
'Fore God, his Grace is bold to trust these traitors.

EXETER
They shall be apprehended by and by.

WESTMORELAND
How smooth and even they do bear themselves,
As if allegiance in their bosoms sat
Crowned with faith and constant loyalty.

BEDFORD
The King hath note of all that they intend,
By interception which they dream not of.

EXETER
Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow,
Whom he hath dulled and cloyed with gracious
favors--
That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell
His sovereign's life to death and treachery!

[Sound Trumpets. Enter the King of England,
Scroop, Cambridge, and Grey, with Attendants.]


KING HENRY
Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.--
My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of
Masham,
And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts.
Think you not that the powers we bear with us
Will cut their passage through the force of France,
Doing the execution and the act
For which we have in head assembled them?

SCROOP
No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.

KING HENRY
I doubt not that, since we are well persuaded
We carry not a heart with us from hence
That grows not in a fair consent with ours,
Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish
Success and conquest to attend on us.

CAMBRIDGE
Never was monarch better feared and loved
Than is your Majesty. There's not, I think, a subject
That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness
Under the sweet shade of your government.

GREY
True. Those that were your father's enemies
Have steeped their galls in honey, and do serve you
With hearts create of duty and of zeal.

KING HENRY
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
And shall forget the office of our hand
Sooner than quittance of desert and merit
According to the weight and worthiness.

SCROOP
So service shall with steeled sinews toil,
And labor shall refresh itself with hope
To do your Grace incessant services.

KING HENRY
We judge no less.--Uncle of Exeter,
Enlarge the man committed yesterday
That railed against our person. We consider
It was excess of wine that set him on,
And on his more advice we pardon him.

SCROOP
That's mercy, but too much security.
Let him be punished, sovereign, lest example
Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.

KING HENRY  O, let us yet be merciful.

CAMBRIDGE
So may your Highness, and yet punish too.

GREY
Sir, you show great mercy if you give him life
After the taste of much correction.

KING HENRY
Alas, your too much love and care of me
Are heavy orisons 'gainst this poor wretch.
If little faults proceeding on distemper
Shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch our eye
When capital crimes, chewed, swallowed, and
digested,
Appear before us? We'll yet enlarge that man,
Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear
care
And tender preservation of our person,
Would have him punished. And now to our French
causes.
Who are the late commissioners?

CAMBRIDGE  I one, my lord.
Your Highness bade me ask for it today.

SCROOP  So did you me, my liege.

GREY  And I, my royal sovereign.

KING HENRY, [giving them papers]
Then Richard, Earl of Cambridge, there is yours--
There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham.--And, sir
knight,
Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours.--
Read them, and know I know your worthiness.--
My Lord of Westmoreland and uncle Exeter,
We will aboard tonight.--Why how now, gentlemen?
What see you in those papers, that you lose
So much complexion?--Look you, how they change.
Their cheeks are paper.--Why, what read you there
That have so cowarded and chased your blood
Out of appearance?

CAMBRIDGE  I do confess my fault,
And do submit me to your Highness' mercy.

GREY/SCROOP  To which we all appeal.

KING HENRY
The mercy that was quick in us but late
By your own counsel is suppressed and killed.
You must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy,
For your own reasons turn into your bosoms
As dogs upon their masters, worrying you.--
See you, my princes and my noble peers,
These English monsters. My Lord of Cambridge
here,
You know how apt our love was to accord
To furnish him with all appurtenants
Belonging to his honor, and this man
Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspired
And sworn unto the practices of France
To kill us here in Hampton; to the which
This knight, no less for bounty bound to us
Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn.--But O,
What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop, thou cruel,
Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature?
Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,
That knew'st the very bottom of my soul,
That almost mightst have coined me into gold,
Wouldst thou have practiced on me for thy use--
May it be possible that foreign hire
Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
That might annoy my finger? 'Tis so strange
That, though the truth of it stands off as gross
As black and white, my eye will scarcely see it.
Treason and murder ever kept together,
As two yoke-devils sworn to either's purpose,
Working so grossly in a natural cause
That admiration did not whoop at them.
But thou, 'gainst all proportion, didst bring in
Wonder to wait on treason and on murder,
And whatsoever cunning fiend it was
That wrought upon thee so preposterously
Hath got the voice in hell for excellence.
All other devils that suggest by treasons
Do botch and bungle up damnation
With patches, colors, and with forms being fetched
From glist'ring semblances of piety;
But he that tempered thee bade thee stand up,
Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason,
Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor.
If that same demon that hath gulled thee thus
Should with his lion gait walk the whole world,
He might return to vasty Tartar back
And tell the legions "I can never win
A soul so easy as that Englishman's."
O, how hast thou with jealousy infected
The sweetness of affiance! Show men dutiful?
Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and learned?
Why, so didst thou. Come they of noble family?
Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious?
Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet,
Free from gross passion or of mirth or anger,
Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood,
Garnished and decked in modest complement,
Not working with the eye without the ear,
And but in purged judgment trusting neither?
Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem.
And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot
To mark the full-fraught man and best endued
With some suspicion. I will weep for thee,
For this revolt of thine methinks is like
Another fall of man.--Their faults are open.
Arrest them to the answer of the law,
And God acquit them of their practices.

EXETER  I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of
Richard, Earl of Cambridge.--
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of
Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham.--
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of
Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland.

SCROOP
Our purposes God justly hath discovered,
And I repent my fault more than my death,
Which I beseech your Highness to forgive,
Although my body pay the price of it.

CAMBRIDGE
For me, the gold of France did not seduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive
The sooner to effect what I intended;
But God be thanked for prevention,
Which I in sufferance heartily will rejoice,
Beseeching God and you to pardon me.

GREY
Never did faithful subject more rejoice
At the discovery of most dangerous treason
Than I do at this hour joy o'er myself,
Prevented from a damned enterprise.
My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.

KING HENRY
God quit you in His mercy. Hear your sentence:
You have conspired against our royal person,
Joined with an enemy proclaimed, and from his
coffers
Received the golden earnest of our death,
Wherein you would have sold your king to
slaughter,
His princes and his peers to servitude,
His subjects to oppression and contempt,
And his whole kingdom into desolation.
Touching our person, seek we no revenge,
But we our kingdom's safety must so tender,
Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws
We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,
Poor miserable wretches, to your death,
The taste whereof God of His mercy give
You patience to endure, and true repentance
Of all your dear offenses.--Bear them hence.
[They exit under guard.]
Now, lords, for France, the enterprise whereof
Shall be to you as us, like glorious.
We doubt not of a fair and lucky war,
Since God so graciously hath brought to light
This dangerous treason lurking in our way
To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now
But every rub is smoothed on our way.
Then forth, dear countrymen. Let us deliver
Our puissance into the hand of God,
Putting it straight in expedition.
Cheerly to sea. The signs of war advance.
No king of England if not king of France.
[Flourish. They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Pistol, Nym, Bardolph, Boy, and Hostess.]


HOSTESS  Prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring
thee to Staines.

PISTOL  No; for my manly heart doth earn.--Bardolph,
be blithe.--Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins.-- Boy,
bristle thy courage up. For Falstaff, he is dead, and
we must earn therefore.

BARDOLPH  Would I were with him, wheresome'er he
is, either in heaven or in hell.

HOSTESS  Nay, sure, he's not in hell! He's in Arthur's
bosom, if ever man went to Arthur's bosom. He
made a finer end, and went away an it had been any
christom child. He parted ev'n just between twelve
and one, ev'n at the turning o' th' tide; for after I saw
him fumble with the sheets and play with flowers
and smile upon his finger's end, I knew there was
but one way, for his nose was as sharp as a pen and
he talked of green fields. "How now, Sir John?"
quoth I. "What, man, be o' good cheer!" So he cried
out "God, God, God!" three or four times. Now I, to
comfort him, bid him he should not think of God; I
hoped there was no need to trouble himself with
any such thoughts yet. So he bade me lay more
clothes on his feet. I put my hand into the bed and
felt them, and they were as cold as any stone. Then I
felt to his knees, and so upward and upward, and
all was as cold as any stone.

NYM  They say he cried out of sack.

HOSTESS  Ay, that he did.

BARDOLPH  And of women.

HOSTESS  Nay, that he did not.

BOY  Yes, that he did, and said they were devils
incarnate.

HOSTESS  He could never abide carnation. 'Twas a
color he never liked.

BOY  He said once, the devil would have him about
women.

HOSTESS  He did in some sort, indeed, handle women,
but then he was rheumatic and talked of the Whore
of Babylon.

BOY  Do you not remember he saw a flea stick upon
Bardolph's nose, and he said it was a black soul
burning in hell?

BARDOLPH  Well, the fuel is gone that maintained that
fire. That's all the riches I got in his service.

NYM  Shall we shog? The King will be gone from
Southampton.

PISTOL  Come, let's away.--My love, give me thy lips.
[They kiss.] Look to my chattels and my movables.
Let senses rule. The word is "Pitch and pay." Trust
none, for oaths are straws, men's faiths are wafer-cakes,
and Holdfast is the only dog, my duck.
Therefore, Caveto be thy counselor. Go, clear thy
crystals.--Yoke-fellows in arms, let us to France,
like horse-leeches, my boys, to suck, to suck, the
very blood to suck.

BOY  And that's but unwholesome food, they say.

PISTOL  Touch her soft mouth, and march.

BARDOLPH, [kissing the Hostess]  Farewell, hostess.

NYM  I cannot kiss, that is the humor of it. But adieu.

PISTOL, [to the Hostess]  Let huswifery appear. Keep
close, I thee command.

HOSTESS  Farewell. Adieu.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Flourish. Enter the French King, the Dauphin, the Dukes
 of Berri and Brittany, the Constable, and others.]


KING OF FRANCE
Thus comes the English with full power upon us,
And more than carefully it us concerns
To answer royally in our defenses.
Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Brittany,
Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth,
And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch,
To line and new-repair our towns of war
With men of courage and with means defendant.
For England his approaches makes as fierce
As waters to the sucking of a gulf.
It fits us then to be as provident
As fear may teach us out of late examples
Left by the fatal and neglected English
Upon our fields.

DAUPHIN  My most redoubted father,
It is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe,
For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom,
Though war nor no known quarrel were in question
But that defenses, musters, preparations
Should be maintained, assembled, and collected
As were a war in expectation.
Therefore I say 'tis meet we all go forth
To view the sick and feeble parts of France.
And let us do it with no show of fear,
No, with no more than if we heard that England
Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance.
For, my good liege, she is so idly kinged,
Her scepter so fantastically borne
By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth,
That fear attends her not.

CONSTABLE  O peace, Prince Dauphin!
You are too much mistaken in this king.
Question your Grace the late ambassadors
With what great state he heard their embassy,
How well supplied with noble councillors,
How modest in exception, and withal
How terrible in constant resolution,
And you shall find his vanities forespent
Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
Covering discretion with a coat of folly,
As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots
That shall first spring and be most delicate.

DAUPHIN
Well, 'tis not so, my Lord High Constable.
But though we think it so, it is no matter.
In cases of defense, 'tis best to weigh
The enemy more mighty than he seems.
So the proportions of defense are filled,
Which of a weak and niggardly projection
Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting
A little cloth.

KING OF FRANCE  Think we King Harry strong,
And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.
The kindred of him hath been fleshed upon us,
And he is bred out of that bloody strain
That haunted us in our familiar paths.
Witness our too-much-memorable shame
When Cressy battle fatally was struck
And all our princes captived by the hand
Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of
Wales,
Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing
Up in the air, crowned with the golden sun,
Saw his heroical seed and smiled to see him
Mangle the work of nature and deface
The patterns that by God and by French fathers
Had twenty years been made. This is a stem
Of that victorious stock, and let us fear
The native mightiness and fate of him.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
Ambassadors from Harry King of England
Do crave admittance to your Majesty.

KING OF FRANCE
We'll give them present audience. Go, and bring
them.	[Messenger exits.]
You see this chase is hotly followed, friends.

DAUPHIN
Turn head and stop pursuit, for coward dogs
Most spend their mouths when what they seem to
threaten
Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,
Take up the English short, and let them know
Of what a monarchy you are the head.
Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin
As self-neglecting.

[Enter Exeter, with Lords and Attendants.]


KING OF FRANCE  From our brother of England?

EXETER
From him, and thus he greets your Majesty:
He wills you, in the name of God almighty,
That you divest yourself and lay apart
The borrowed glories that, by gift of heaven,
By law of nature and of nations, 'longs
To him and to his heirs--namely, the crown
And all wide-stretched honors that pertain
By custom and the ordinance of times
Unto the crown of France. That you may know
'Tis no sinister nor no awkward claim
Picked from the wormholes of long-vanished days
Nor from the dust of old oblivion raked,
He sends you this most memorable line,
[He offers a paper.]
In every branch truly demonstrative,
Willing you overlook this pedigree,
And when you find him evenly derived
From his most famed of famous ancestors,
Edward the Third, he bids you then resign
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held
From him, the native and true challenger.

KING OF FRANCE  Or else what follows?

EXETER
Bloody constraint, for if you hide the crown
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it.
Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
In thunder and in earthquake like a Jove,
That, if requiring fail, he will compel,
And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,
Deliver up the crown and to take mercy
On the poor souls for whom this hungry war
Opens his vasty jaws, and on your head
Turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries,
The dead men's blood, the prived maidens'
groans,
For husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers
That shall be swallowed in this controversy.
This is his claim, his threat'ning, and my message--
Unless the Dauphin be in presence here,
To whom expressly I bring greeting too.

KING OF FRANCE
For us, we will consider of this further.
Tomorrow shall you bear our full intent
Back to our brother of England.

DAUPHIN, [to Exeter]  For the Dauphin,
I stand here for him. What to him from England?

EXETER
Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt,
And anything that may not misbecome
The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.
Thus says my king: an if your father's Highness
Do not, in grant of all demands at large,
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty,
He'll call you to so hot an answer of it
That caves and womby vaultages of France
Shall chide your trespass and return your mock
In second accent of his ordinance.

DAUPHIN
Say, if my father render fair return,
It is against my will, for I desire
Nothing but odds with England. To that end,
As matching to his youth and vanity,
I did present him with the Paris balls.

EXETER
He'll make your Paris Louvre shake for it,
Were it the mistress court of mighty Europe.
And be assured you'll find a difference,
As we his subjects have in wonder found,
Between the promise of his greener days
And these he masters now. Now he weighs time
Even to the utmost grain. That you shall read
In your own losses, if he stay in France.

KING OF FRANCE
Tomorrow shall you know our mind at full.
[Flourish.]

EXETER
Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king
Come here himself to question our delay,
For he is footed in this land already.

KING OF FRANCE
You shall be soon dispatched with fair conditions.
A night is but small breath and little pause
To answer matters of this consequence.
[Flourish. They exit.]


ACT 3
=====


[Enter Chorus.]


CHORUS
Thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies
In motion of no less celerity
Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen
The well-appointed king at Dover pier
Embark his royalty, and his brave fleet
With silken streamers the young Phoebus
fanning.
Play with your fancies and in them behold,
Upon the hempen tackle, shipboys climbing.
Hear the shrill whistle, which doth order give
To sounds confused. Behold the threaden sails,
Borne with th' invisible and creeping wind,
Draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea,
Breasting the lofty surge. O, do but think
You stand upon the rivage and behold
A city on th' inconstant billows dancing,
For so appears this fleet majestical,
Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow!
Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy,
And leave your England, as dead midnight still,
Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women,
Either past or not arrived to pith and puissance,
For who is he whose chin is but enriched
With one appearing hair that will not follow
These culled and choice-drawn cavaliers to France?
Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege;
Behold the ordnance on their carriages,
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur.
Suppose th' Ambassador from the French comes
back,
Tells Harry that the King doth offer him
Katherine his daughter and with her, to dowry,
Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms.
The offer likes not, and the nimble gunner
With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,
[Alarum, and chambers go off.]
And down goes all before them. Still be kind,
And eke out our performance with your mind.
[He exits.]

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the King of England, Exeter, Bedford, and
Gloucester. Alarum. Enter Soldiers with scaling
ladders at Harfleur.]


KING HENRY
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once
more,
Or close the wall up with our English dead!
In peace there's nothing so becomes a man
As modest stillness and humility,
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the tiger:
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage,
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect,
Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like the brass cannon, let the brow o'erwhelm it
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
O'erhang and jutty his confounded base
Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean.
Now set the teeth, and stretch the nostril wide,
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To his full height. On, on, you noblest English,
Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof,
Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,
Have in these parts from morn till even fought,
And sheathed their swords for lack of argument.
Dishonor not your mothers. Now attest
That those whom you called fathers did beget you.
Be copy now to men of grosser blood
And teach them how to war. And you, good
yeomen,
Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
The mettle of your pasture. Let us swear
That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt
not,
For there is none of you so mean and base
That hath not noble luster in your eyes.
I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
Straining upon the start. The game's afoot.
Follow your spirit, and upon this charge
Cry "God for Harry, England, and Saint George!"
[Alarum, and chambers go off.]
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Nym, Bardolph, Pistol, and Boy.]


BARDOLPH  On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the
breach!

NYM  Pray thee, corporal, stay. The knocks are too hot,
and, for mine own part, I have not a case of lives.
The humor of it is too hot; that is the very plainsong
of it.

PISTOL  "The plainsong" is most just, for humors do
abound.
Knocks go and come. God's vassals drop and die,
[Sings]	   And sword and shield,
	   In bloody field,
	Doth win immortal fame.

BOY  Would I were in an alehouse in London! I would
give all my fame for a pot of ale, and safety.

PISTOL  And I.
[Sings]	If wishes would prevail with me,
	My purpose should not fail with me,
	   But thither would I hie.

BOY [sings]	   As duly,
	   But not as truly,
	As bird doth sing on bough.

[Enter Fluellen.
]

FLUELLEN
Up to the breach, you dogs! Avaunt, you cullions!

PISTOL  Be merciful, great duke, to men of mold. Abate
thy rage, abate thy manly rage, abate thy rage, great
duke. Good bawcock, 'bate thy rage. Use lenity,
sweet chuck.

NYM, [to Fluellen]  These be good humors. Your Honor
wins bad humors.
[All but the Boy exit.]

BOY  As young as I am, I have observed these three
swashers. I am boy to them all three, but all they
three, though they would serve me, could not be
man to me. For indeed three such antics do not
amount to a man: for Bardolph, he is white-livered
and red-faced, by the means whereof he faces it out
but fights not; for Pistol, he hath a killing tongue
and a quiet sword, by the means whereof he breaks
words and keeps whole weapons; for Nym, he hath
heard that men of few words are the best men, and
therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest he should
be thought a coward, but his few bad words are
matched with as few good deeds, for he never broke
any man's head but his own, and that was against a
post when he was drunk. They will steal anything
and call it purchase. Bardolph stole a lute case, bore
it twelve leagues, and sold it for three halfpence.
Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in filching,
and in Calais they stole a fire shovel. I knew by that
piece of service the men would carry coals. They
would have me as familiar with men's pockets as
their gloves or their handkerchers, which makes
much against my manhood, if I should take from
another's pocket to put into mine, for it is plain
pocketing up of wrongs. I must leave them and seek
some better service. Their villainy goes against my
weak stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.
[He exits.]

[Enter Fluellen and Gower.]


GOWER  Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to
the mines; the Duke of Gloucester would speak
with you.

FLUELLEN  To the mines? Tell you the Duke it is not so
good to come to the mines, for, look you, the mines
is not according to the disciplines of the war. The
concavities of it is not sufficient, for, look you, th'
athversary, you may discuss unto the Duke, look
you, is digt himself four yard under the countermines.
By Cheshu, I think he will plow up all if
there is not better directions.

GOWER  The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of
the siege is given, is altogether directed by an
Irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i' faith.

FLUELLEN  It is Captain Macmorris, is it not?

GOWER  I think it be.

FLUELLEN  By Cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world. I
will verify as much in his beard. He has no more
directions in the true disciplines of the wars, look
you, of the Roman disciplines, than is a puppy dog.

[Enter Captain Macmorris, and Captain Jamy.]


GOWER  Here he comes, and the Scots captain, Captain
Jamy, with him.

FLUELLEN  Captain Jamy is a marvelous falorous gentleman,
that is certain, and of great expedition and
knowledge in th' aunchient wars, upon my particular
knowledge of his directions. By Cheshu, he will
maintain his argument as well as any military man
in the world in the disciplines of the pristine wars
of the Romans.

JAMY  I say gudday, Captain Fluellen.

FLUELLEN  Godden to your Worship, good Captain
James.

GOWER  How now, Captain Macmorris, have you quit
the mines? Have the pioners given o'er?

MACMORRIS  By Chrish, la, 'tish ill done. The work ish
give over. The trompet sound the retreat. By my
hand I swear, and my father's soul, the work ish ill
done. It ish give over. I would have blowed up the
town, so Chrish save me, la, in an hour. O, 'tish ill
done, 'tish ill done, by my hand, 'tish ill done.

FLUELLEN  Captain Macmorris, I beseech you now,
will you voutsafe me, look you, a few disputations
with you as partly touching or concerning the
disciplines of the war, the Roman wars? In the way
of argument, look you, and friendly communication,
partly to satisfy my opinion, and partly for the
satisfaction, look you, of my mind, as touching the
direction of the military discipline, that is the point.

JAMY  It sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captens bath,
and I sall quit you with gud leve, as I may pick
occasion, that sall I, marry.

MACMORRIS  It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save
me. The day is hot, and the weather, and the wars,
and the King, and the dukes. It is no time to
discourse. The town is beseeched. An the trumpet
call us to the breach and we talk and, be Chrish, do
nothing, 'tis shame for us all. So God sa' me, 'tis
shame to stand still. It is shame, by my hand. And
there is throats to be cut, and works to be done,
and there ish nothing done, so Christ sa' me, la.

JAMY  By the Mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves
to slomber, ay'll de gud service, or I'll lig i'
th' grund for it, ay, or go to death. And I'll pay 't as
valorously as I may, that sall I suerly do, that is the
breff and the long. Marry, I wad full fain heard
some question 'tween you tway.

FLUELLEN  Captain Macmorris, I think, look you, under
your correction, there is not many of your
nation--

MACMORRIS  Of my nation? What ish my nation? Ish a
villain and a basterd and a knave and a rascal. What
ish my nation? Who talks of my nation?

FLUELLEN  Look you, if you take the matter otherwise
than is meant, Captain Macmorris, peradventure I
shall think you do not use me with that affability as,
in discretion, you ought to use me, look you, being
as good a man as yourself, both in the disciplines of
war and in the derivation of my birth, and in other
particularities.

MACMORRIS  I do not know you so good a man as
myself. So Chrish save me, I will cut off your head.

GOWER  Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.

JAMY  Ah, that's a foul fault.
[A parley sounds.]

GOWER  The town sounds a parley.

FLUELLEN  Captain Macmorris, when there is more
better opportunity to be required, look you, I will
be so bold as to tell you I know the disciplines of
war, and there is an end.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter the King of England and all his train
before the gates.]


KING HENRY, [to the men of Harfleur]
How yet resolves the Governor of the town?
This is the latest parle we will admit.
Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves
Or, like to men proud of destruction,
Defy us to our worst. For, as I am a soldier,
A name that in my thoughts becomes me best,
If I begin the batt'ry once again,
I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur
Till in her ashes she lie buried.
The gates of mercy shall be all shut up,
And the fleshed soldier, rough and hard of heart,
In liberty of bloody hand, shall range
With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass
Your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants.
What is it then to me if impious war,
Arrayed in flames like to the prince of fiends,
Do with his smirched complexion all fell feats
Enlinked to waste and desolation?
What is 't to me, when you yourselves are cause,
If your pure maidens fall into the hand
Of hot and forcing violation?
What rein can hold licentious wickedness
When down the hill he holds his fierce career?
We may as bootless spend our vain command
Upon th' enraged soldiers in their spoil
As send precepts to the Leviathan
To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harfleur,
Take pity of your town and of your people
Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command,
Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace
O'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds
Of heady murder, spoil, and villainy.
If not, why, in a moment look to see
The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand
Desire the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters,
Your fathers taken by the silver beards
And their most reverend heads dashed to the walls,
Your naked infants spitted upon pikes
Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confused
Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry
At Herod's bloody-hunting slaughtermen.
What say you? Will you yield and this avoid
Or, guilty in defense, be thus destroyed?

[Enter Governor.]


GOVERNOR
Our expectation hath this day an end.
The Dauphin, whom of succors we entreated,
Returns us that his powers are yet not ready
To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great king,
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.
Enter our gates, dispose of us and ours,
For we no longer are defensible.

KING HENRY
Open your gates.	[Governor exits.]
Come, uncle Exeter,
Go you and enter Harfleur. There remain,
And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French.
Use mercy to them all for us, dear uncle.
The winter coming on and sickness growing
Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais.
Tonight in Harfleur will we be your guest.
Tomorrow for the march are we addressed.
[Flourish, and enter the town.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Katherine and Alice, an old Gentlewoman.]


KATHERINE  Alice, tu as ete en Angleterre, et tu parles
bien le langage.

ALICE  Un peu, madame.

KATHERINE  Je te prie, m'enseignez. Il faut que j'apprenne
a parler. Comment appelez-vous "la main" en
anglais?

ALICE  La main? Elle est appelee "de hand."

KATHERINE  De hand. Et "les doigts"?

ALICE  Les doigts? Ma foi, j'oublie les doigts; mais je
me souviendrai. Les doigts? Je pense qu'ils sont
appeles "de fingres"; oui, de fingres.

KATHERINE  La main, de hand. Les doigts, le fingres.
Je pense que je suis le bon ecolier. J'ai gagne deux
mots d'anglais vitement. Comment appelez-vous "les
ongles"?

ALICE  Les ongles? Nous les appelons "de nailes."

KATHERINE  De nailes. Ecoutez. Dites-moi si je parle
bien: de hand, de fingres, et de nailes.

ALICE  C'est bien dit, madame. Il est fort bon anglais.

KATHERINE  Dites-moi l'anglais pour "le bras."

ALICE  "De arme," madame.

KATHERINE  Et "le coude"?

ALICE  "D' elbow."

KATHERINE  D' elbow. Je m'en fais la repetition de tous
les mots que vous m'avez appris des a present.

ALICE  Il est trop difficile, madame, comme je pense.

KATHERINE  Excusez-moi, Alice. Ecoutez: d' hand, de
fingre, de nailes, d' arma, de bilbow.

ALICE  D' elbow, madame.

KATHERINE  O Seigneur Dieu! Je m'en oublie; d' elbow.
Comment appelez-vous "le col"?

ALICE  "De nick," madame.

KATHERINE  De nick. Et "le menton"?

ALICE  "De chin."

KATHERINE  De sin. Le col, de nick; le menton, de sin.

ALICE  Oui. Sauf votre honneur, en verite vous prononcez
les mots aussi droit que les natifs d'Angleterre.

KATHERINE  Je ne doute point d'apprendre, par le grace
de Dieu, et en peu de temps.

ALICE  N'avez-vous pas deja oublie ce que je vous ai
enseigne?

KATHERINE  Non. Je reciterai a vous promptement: d'
hand, de fingre, de mailes--

ALICE  De nailes, madame.

KATHERINE  De nailes, de arme, de ilbow--

ALICE  Sauf votre honneur, d' elbow.

KATHERINE  Ainsi dis-je: d' elbow, de nick, et de sin.
Comment appelez-vous "le pied" et "la robe"?

ALICE  "Le foot," madame, et "le count."

KATHERINE  Le foot, et le count. O Seigneur Dieu! Ils
sont les mots de son mauvais, corruptible, gros, et
impudique, et non pour les dames d'honneur d'user.
Je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots devant les seigneurs
de France, pour tout le monde. Foh! Le foot et le
count! Neanmoins, je reciterai une autre fois ma
lecon ensemble: d' hand, de fingre, de nailes, d'
arme, d' elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot, le count.

ALICE  Excellent, madame.

KATHERINE  C'est assez pour une fois. Allons-nous a
diner.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter the King of France, the Dauphin, the Duke of
Brittany, the Constable of France, and others.]


KING OF FRANCE
'Tis certain he hath passed the river Somme.

CONSTABLE
An if he be not fought withal, my lord,
Let us not live in France. Let us quit all,
And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.

DAUPHIN
O Dieu vivant, shall a few sprays of us,
The emptying of our fathers' luxury,
Our scions, put in wild and savage stock,
Spurt up so suddenly into the clouds
And overlook their grafters?

BRITTANY
Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards!
Mort de ma vie, if they march along
Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom
To buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm
In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.

CONSTABLE
Dieu de batailles, where have they this mettle?
Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull,
On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
A drench for sur-reined jades, their barley broth,
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine,
Seem frosty? O, for honor of our land,
Let us not hang like roping icicles
Upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty
people
Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields!
"Poor" we may call them in their native lords.

DAUPHIN  By faith and honor,
Our madams mock at us and plainly say
Our mettle is bred out, and they will give
Their bodies to the lust of English youth
To new-store France with bastard warriors.

BRITTANY
They bid us to the English dancing-schools,
And teach lavoltas high, and swift corantos,
Saying our grace is only in our heels
And that we are most lofty runaways.

KING OF FRANCE
Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence.
Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.
Up, princes, and, with spirit of honor edged
More sharper than your swords, hie to the field:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;
You Dukes of Orleans, Bourbon, and of Berri,
Alencon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy;
Jacques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont,
Beaumont, Grandpre, Roussi, and Faulconbridge,
Foix, Lestrale, Bouciquault, and Charolois;
High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and
knights,
For your great seats now quit you of great shames.
Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land
With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur.
Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow
Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat
The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon.
Go down upon him--you have power enough--
And in a captive chariot into Rouen
Bring him our prisoner.

CONSTABLE  This becomes the great!
Sorry am I his numbers are so few,
His soldiers sick and famished in their march,
For, I am sure, when he shall see our army,
He'll drop his heart into the sink of fear
And for achievement offer us his ransom.

KING OF FRANCE
Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy,
And let him say to England that we send
To know what willing ransom he will give.--
Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.

DAUPHIN
Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.

KING
Be patient, for you shall remain with us.--
Now forth, Lord Constable and princes all,
And quickly bring us word of England's fall.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Captains, English and Welsh, Gower and Fluellen.]


GOWER  How now, Captain Fluellen? Come you from
the bridge?

FLUELLEN  I assure you there is very excellent services
committed at the bridge.

GOWER  Is the Duke of Exeter safe?

FLUELLEN  The Duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as
Agamemnon, and a man that I love and honor with
my soul and my heart and my duty and my life and
my living and my uttermost power. He is not, God
be praised and blessed, any hurt in the world, but
keeps the bridge most valiantly, with excellent
discipline. There is an aunchient lieutenant there at
the pridge; I think in my very conscience he is as
valiant a man as Mark Antony, and he is a man of no
estimation in the world, but I did see him do as
gallant service.

GOWER  What do you call him?

FLUELLEN  He is called Aunchient Pistol.

GOWER  I know him not.

[Enter Pistol.]


FLUELLEN  Here is the man.

PISTOL  Captain, I thee beseech to do me favors. The
Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.

FLUELLEN  Ay, I praise God, and I have merited some
love at his hands.

PISTOL  Bardolph, a soldier firm and sound of heart and
of buxom valor, hath, by cruel Fate and giddy
Fortune's furious fickle wheel, that goddess blind,
that stands upon the rolling restless stone--

FLUELLEN  By your patience, Aunchient Pistol, Fortune
is painted blind, with a muffler afore her eyes, to
signify to you that Fortune is blind; and she is
painted also with a wheel to signify to you, which is
the moral of it, that she is turning and inconstant,
and mutability and variation; and her foot, look you,
is fixed upon a spherical stone, which rolls and rolls
and rolls. In good truth, the poet makes a most
excellent description of it. Fortune is an excellent
moral.

PISTOL  Fortune is Bardolph's foe and frowns on him,
for he hath stolen a pax and hanged must he be. A
damned death! Let gallows gape for dog, let man go
free, and let not hemp his windpipe suffocate. But
Exeter hath given the doom of death for pax of little
price. Therefore go speak; the Duke will hear thy
voice, and let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut
with edge of penny cord and vile reproach. Speak,
captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.

FLUELLEN  Aunchient Pistol, I do partly understand
your meaning.

PISTOL  Why then, rejoice therefore.

FLUELLEN  Certainly, aunchient, it is not a thing to
rejoice at, for if, look you, he were my brother, I
would desire the Duke to use his good pleasure and
put him to execution, for discipline ought to be
used.

PISTOL  Die and be damned, and figo for thy friendship!

FLUELLEN  It is well.

PISTOL  The fig of Spain!	[He exits.]

FLUELLEN  Very good.

GOWER  Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal. I
remember him now, a bawd, a cutpurse.

FLUELLEN  I'll assure you he uttered as prave words at
the pridge as you shall see in a summer's day. But it
is very well; what he has spoke to me, that is well, I
warrant you, when time is serve.

GOWER  Why, 'tis a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and
then goes to the wars to grace himself at his return
into London under the form of a soldier; and such
fellows are perfect in the great commanders'
names, and they will learn you by rote where
services were done--at such and such a sconce, at
such a breach, at such a convoy; who came off
bravely, who was shot, who disgraced, what terms
the enemy stood on; and this they con perfectly in
the phrase of war, which they trick up with new-tuned
oaths; and what a beard of the general's cut
and a horrid suit of the camp will do among
foaming bottles and ale-washed wits is wonderful to
be thought on. But you must learn to know such
slanders of the age, or else you may be marvelously
mistook.

FLUELLEN  I tell you what, Captain Gower. I do perceive
he is not the man that he would gladly make
show to the world he is. If I find a hole in his coat, I
will tell him my mind.

[Drum and Colors. Enter the King of England and his
poor Soldiers, and Gloucester.]

Hark you, the King is coming, and I must speak
with him from the pridge.--God pless your
Majesty.

KING HENRY  How now, Fluellen, cam'st thou from the
bridge?

FLUELLEN  Ay, so please your Majesty. The Duke of
Exeter has very gallantly maintained the pridge.
The French is gone off, look you, and there is gallant
and most prave passages. Marry, th' athversary was
have possession of the pridge, but he is enforced
to retire, and the Duke of Exeter is master of the
pridge. I can tell your Majesty, the Duke is a prave
man.

KING HENRY  What men have you lost, Fluellen?

FLUELLEN  The perdition of th' athversary hath been
very great, reasonable great. Marry, for my part, I
think the Duke hath lost never a man but one that is
like to be executed for robbing a church, one
Bardolph, if your Majesty know the man. His face is
all bubukles and whelks and knobs and flames o'
fire; and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a
coal of fire, sometimes plue and sometimes red, but
his nose is executed, and his fire's out.

KING HENRY  We would have all such offenders so cut
off; and we give express charge that in our marches
through the country there be nothing compelled
from the villages, nothing taken but paid for,
none of the French upbraided or abused in disdainful
language; for when lenity and cruelty play
for a kingdom, the gentler gamester is the soonest
winner.

[Tucket. Enter Montjoy.]


MONTJOY  You know me by my habit.

KING HENRY  Well then, I know thee. What shall I know
of thee?

MONTJOY  My master's mind.

KING HENRY  Unfold it.

MONTJOY  Thus says my king: "Say thou to Harry of
England, though we seemed dead, we did but sleep.
Advantage is a better soldier than rashness. Tell him
we could have rebuked him at Harfleur, but that we
thought not good to bruise an injury till it were full
ripe. Now we speak upon our cue, and our voice is
imperial. England shall repent his folly, see his
weakness, and admire our sufferance. Bid him
therefore consider of his ransom, which must proportion
the losses we have borne, the subjects we
have lost, the disgrace we have digested, which, in
weight to reanswer, his pettiness would bow under.
For our losses, his exchequer is too poor; for th'
effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom
too faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own
person kneeling at our feet but a weak and worthless
satisfaction. To this, add defiance, and tell him,
for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers,
whose condemnation is pronounced." So far my
king and master; so much my office.

KING HENRY
What is thy name? I know thy quality.

MONTJOY  Montjoy.

KING HENRY
Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back,
And tell thy king I do not seek him now
But could be willing to march on to Calais
Without impeachment, for, to say the sooth,
Though 'tis no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of craft and vantage,
My people are with sickness much enfeebled,
My numbers lessened, and those few I have
Almost no better than so many French,
Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald,
I thought upon one pair of English legs
Did march three Frenchmen. Yet forgive me, God,
That I do brag thus. This your air of France
Hath blown that vice in me. I must repent.
Go therefore, tell thy master: here I am.
My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk,
My army but a weak and sickly guard,
Yet, God before, tell him we will come on
Though France himself and such another neighbor
Stand in our way. There's for thy labor, Montjoy.
[Gives money.]
Go bid thy master well advise himself:
If we may pass, we will; if we be hindered,
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood
Discolor. And so, Montjoy, fare you well.
The sum of all our answer is but this:
We would not seek a battle as we are,
Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it.
So tell your master.

MONTJOY
I shall deliver so. Thanks to your Highness.
[He exits.]

GLOUCESTER
I hope they will not come upon us now.

KING HENRY
We are in God's hand, brother, not in theirs.
March to the bridge. It now draws toward night.
Beyond the river we'll encamp ourselves,
And on tomorrow bid them march away.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter the Constable of France, the Lord Rambures,
Orleans, Dauphin, with others.]


CONSTABLE  Tut, I have the best armor of the world.
Would it were day!

ORLEANS  You have an excellent armor, but let my
horse have his due.

CONSTABLE  It is the best horse of Europe.

ORLEANS  Will it never be morning?

DAUPHIN  My Lord of Orleans and my Lord High Constable,
you talk of horse and armor?

ORLEANS  You are as well provided of both as any
prince in the world.

DAUPHIN  What a long night is this! I will not change
my horse with any that treads but on four pasterns.
Ca, ha! He bounds from the earth, as if his
entrails were hairs, le cheval volant, the Pegasus, qui
a les narines de feu. When I bestride him, I soar; I
am a hawk; he trots the air. The earth sings when he
touches it. The basest horn of his hoof is more
musical than the pipe of Hermes.

ORLEANS  He's of the color of the nutmeg.

DAUPHIN  And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for
Perseus. He is pure air and fire, and the dull
elements of earth and water never appear in him,
but only in patient stillness while his rider mounts
him. He is indeed a horse, and all other jades you
may call beasts.

CONSTABLE  Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and
excellent horse.

DAUPHIN  It is the prince of palfreys; his neigh is like
the bidding of a monarch, and his countenance
enforces homage.

ORLEANS  No more, cousin.

DAUPHIN  Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from
the rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb,
vary deserved praise on my palfrey. It is a theme as
fluent as the sea. Turn the sands into eloquent
tongues, and my horse is argument for them all. 'Tis
a subject for a sovereign to reason on, and for a
sovereign's sovereign to ride on, and for the world,
familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart their
particular functions and wonder at him. I once writ
a sonnet in his praise and began thus: "Wonder of
nature--"

ORLEANS  I have heard a sonnet begin so to one's
mistress.

DAUPHIN  Then did they imitate that which I composed
to my courser, for my horse is my mistress.

ORLEANS  Your mistress bears well.

DAUPHIN  Me well--which is the prescript praise and
perfection of a good and particular mistress.

CONSTABLE  Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress
shrewdly shook your back.

DAUPHIN  So perhaps did yours.

CONSTABLE  Mine was not bridled.

DAUPHIN  O, then belike she was old and gentle, and
you rode like a kern of Ireland, your French hose
off, and in your strait strossers.

CONSTABLE  You have good judgment in horsemanship.

DAUPHIN  Be warned by me, then: they that ride so, and
ride not warily, fall into foul bogs. I had rather have
my horse to my mistress.

CONSTABLE  I had as lief have my mistress a jade.

DAUPHIN  I tell thee, constable, my mistress wears his
own hair.

CONSTABLE  I could make as true a boast as that if I had
a sow to my mistress.

DAUPHIN  "Le chien est retourne a son propre vomissement,
et la truie lavee au bourbier." Thou mak'st use
of anything.

CONSTABLE  Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress,
or any such proverb so little kin to the purpose.

RAMBURES  My Lord Constable, the armor that I saw in
your tent tonight, are those stars or suns upon it?

CONSTABLE  Stars, my lord.

DAUPHIN  Some of them will fall tomorrow, I hope.

CONSTABLE  And yet my sky shall not want.

DAUPHIN  That may be, for you bear a many superfluously,
and 'twere more honor some were away.

CONSTABLE  Ev'n as your horse bears your praises--
who would trot as well were some of your brags
dismounted.

DAUPHIN  Would I were able to load him with his
desert! Will it never be day? I will trot tomorrow a
mile, and my way shall be paved with English faces.

CONSTABLE  I will not say so for fear I should be faced
out of my way. But I would it were morning, for I
would fain be about the ears of the English.

RAMBURES  Who will go to hazard with me for twenty
prisoners?

CONSTABLE  You must first go yourself to hazard ere you
have them.

DAUPHIN  'Tis midnight. I'll go arm myself.	[He exits.]

ORLEANS  The Dauphin longs for morning.

RAMBURES  He longs to eat the English.

CONSTABLE  I think he will eat all he kills.

ORLEANS  By the white hand of my lady, he's a gallant
prince.

CONSTABLE  Swear by her foot, that she may tread out
the oath.

ORLEANS  He is simply the most active gentleman of
France.

CONSTABLE  Doing is activity, and he will still be doing.

ORLEANS  He never did harm, that I heard of.

CONSTABLE  Nor will do none tomorrow. He will keep
that good name still.

ORLEANS  I know him to be valiant.

CONSTABLE  I was told that by one that knows him
better than you.

ORLEANS  What's he?

CONSTABLE  Marry, he told me so himself, and he said
he cared not who knew it.

ORLEANS  He needs not. It is no hidden virtue in him.

CONSTABLE  By my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody
saw it but his lackey. 'Tis a hooded valor, and when
it appears, it will bate.

ORLEANS  Ill will never said well.

CONSTABLE  I will cap that proverb with "There is
flattery in friendship."

ORLEANS  And I will take up that with "Give the devil
his due."

CONSTABLE  Well placed; there stands your friend for
the devil. Have at the very eye of that proverb with
"A pox of the devil."

ORLEANS  You are the better at proverbs, by how much
"A fool's bolt is soon shot."

CONSTABLE  You have shot over.

ORLEANS  'Tis not the first time you were overshot.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  My Lord High Constable, the English lie
within fifteen hundred paces of your tents.

CONSTABLE  Who hath measured the ground?

MESSENGER  The Lord Grandpre.

CONSTABLE  A valiant and most expert gentleman.--
Would it were day! Alas, poor Harry of England! He
longs not for the dawning as we do.

ORLEANS  What a wretched and peevish fellow is this
King of England to mope with his fat-brained
followers so far out of his knowledge.

CONSTABLE  If the English had any apprehension, they
would run away.

ORLEANS  That they lack; for if their heads had any
intellectual armor, they could never wear such
heavy headpieces.

RAMBURES  That island of England breeds very valiant
creatures. Their mastiffs are of unmatchable
courage.

ORLEANS  Foolish curs, that run winking into the
mouth of a Russian bear and have their heads
crushed like rotten apples. You may as well say
that's a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the
lip of a lion.

CONSTABLE  Just, just; and the men do sympathize with
the mastiffs in robustious and rough coming on,
leaving their wits with their wives. And then give
them great meals of beef and iron and steel, they
will eat like wolves and fight like devils.

ORLEANS  Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of
beef.

CONSTABLE  Then shall we find tomorrow they have
only stomachs to eat and none to fight. Now is it
time to arm. Come, shall we about it?

ORLEANS
It is now two o'clock. But, let me see, by ten
We shall have each a hundred Englishmen.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

[Enter Chorus.]


CHORUS
Now entertain conjecture of a time
When creeping murmur and the poring dark
Fills the wide vessel of the universe.
From camp to camp, through the foul womb of
night,
The hum of either army stilly sounds,
That the fixed sentinels almost receive
The secret whispers of each other's watch.
Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames
Each battle sees the other's umbered face;
Steed threatens steed in high and boastful neighs
Piercing the night's dull ear; and from the tents
The armorers, accomplishing the knights,
With busy hammers closing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation.
The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll,
And, the third hour of drowsy morning named,
Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
The confident and overlusty French
Do the low-rated English play at dice
And chide the cripple, tardy-gaited night,
Who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp
So tediously away. The poor condemned English,
Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires
Sit patiently and inly ruminate
The morning's danger; and their gesture sad,
Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats,
Presenteth them unto the gazing moon
So many horrid ghosts. O now, who will behold
The royal captain of this ruined band
Walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent,
Let him cry, "Praise and glory on his head!"
For forth he goes and visits all his host,
Bids them good morrow with a modest smile,
And calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen.
Upon his royal face there is no note
How dread an army hath enrounded him,
Nor doth he dedicate one jot of color
Unto the weary and all-watched night,
But freshly looks and overbears attaint
With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty,
That every wretch, pining and pale before,
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks.
A largesse universal, like the sun,
His liberal eye doth give to everyone,
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all
Behold, as may unworthiness define,
A little touch of Harry in the night.
And so our scene must to the battle fly,
Where, O for pity, we shall much disgrace,
With four or five most vile and ragged foils
Right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous,
The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see,
Minding true things by what their mock'ries be.
[He exits.]

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the King of England, Bedford, and Gloucester.]


KING HENRY
Gloucester, 'tis true that we are in great danger.
The greater therefore should our courage be.--
Good morrow, brother Bedford. God almighty,
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distill it out.
For our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers,
Which is both healthful and good husbandry.
Besides, they are our outward consciences
And preachers to us all, admonishing
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather honey from the weed
And make a moral of the devil himself.

[Enter Erpingham.]

Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham.
A good soft pillow for that good white head
Were better than a churlish turf of France.

ERPINGHAM
Not so, my liege, this lodging likes me better,
Since I may say "Now lie I like a king."

KING HENRY
'Tis good for men to love their present pains
Upon example. So the spirit is eased;
And when the mind is quickened, out of doubt,
The organs, though defunct and dead before,
Break up their drowsy grave and newly move
With casted slough and fresh legerity.
Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas.
[He puts on Erpingham's cloak.]
Brothers both,
Commend me to the princes in our camp,
Do my good morrow to them, and anon
Desire them all to my pavilion.

GLOUCESTER  We shall, my liege.

ERPINGHAM  Shall I attend your Grace?

KING HENRY  No, my good knight.
Go with my brothers to my lords of England.
I and my bosom must debate awhile,
And then I would no other company.

ERPINGHAM
The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry.
[All but the King exit.]

KING HENRY
God-a-mercy, old heart, thou speak'st cheerfully.

[Enter Pistol.]


PISTOL  Qui vous la?

KING HENRY  A friend.

PISTOL  Discuss unto me: art thou officer or art thou
base, common, and popular?

KING HENRY  I am a gentleman of a company.

PISTOL  Trail'st thou the puissant pike?

KING HENRY  Even so. What are you?

PISTOL  As good a gentleman as the Emperor.

KING HENRY  Then you are a better than the King.

PISTOL  The King's a bawcock and a heart of gold, a lad
of life, an imp of fame, of parents good, of fist most
valiant. I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heartstring I
love the lovely bully. What is thy name?

KING HENRY  Harry le Roy.

PISTOL  Le Roy? A Cornish name. Art thou of Cornish
crew?

KING HENRY  No, I am a Welshman.

PISTOL  Know'st thou Fluellen?

KING HENRY  Yes.

PISTOL  Tell him I'll knock his leek about his pate upon
Saint Davy's day.

KING HENRY  Do not you wear your dagger in your cap
that day, lest he knock that about yours.

PISTOL  Art thou his friend?

KING HENRY  And his kinsman too.

PISTOL  The figo for thee then!

KING HENRY  I thank you. God be with you.

PISTOL  My name is Pistol called.	[He exits.]

KING HENRY  It sorts well with your fierceness.
[He steps aside.]

[Enter Fluellen and Gower.]


GOWER  Captain Fluellen.

FLUELLEN  So. In the name of Jesu Christ, speak fewer.
It is the greatest admiration in the universal world
when the true and aunchient prerogatifes and
laws of the wars is not kept. If you would take the
pains but to examine the wars of Pompey the
Great, you shall find, I warrant you, that there is
no tiddle taddle nor pibble babble in Pompey's
camp. I warrant you, you shall find the ceremonies
of the wars and the cares of it and the forms
of it and the sobriety of it and the modesty of it to
be otherwise.

GOWER  Why, the enemy is loud. You hear him all
night.

FLUELLEN  If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating
coxcomb, is it meet, think you, that we should also,
look you, be an ass and a fool and a prating
coxcomb, in your own conscience now?

GOWER  I will speak lower.

FLUELLEN  I pray you and beseech you that you will.
[Gower and Fluellen exit.]

KING HENRY
Though it appear a little out of fashion,
There is much care and valor in this Welshman.

[Enter three Soldiers, John Bates, Alexander Court, and
Michael Williams.]


COURT  Brother John Bates, is not that the morning
which breaks yonder?

BATES  I think it be, but we have no great cause to desire
the approach of day.

WILLIAMS  We see yonder the beginning of the day, but
I think we shall never see the end of it.--Who goes
there?

KING HENRY  A friend.

WILLIAMS  Under what captain serve you?

KING HENRY  Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.

WILLIAMS  A good old commander and a most kind
gentleman. I pray you, what thinks he of our
estate?

KING HENRY  Even as men wracked upon a sand, that
look to be washed off the next tide.

BATES  He hath not told his thought to the King?

KING HENRY  No. Nor it is not meet he should, for,
though I speak it to you, I think the King is but a
man as I am. The violet smells to him as it doth to
me. The element shows to him as it doth to me. All
his senses have but human conditions. His ceremonies
laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man,
and though his affections are higher mounted than
ours, yet when they stoop, they stoop with the like
wing. Therefore, when he sees reason of fears as we
do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish as
ours are. Yet, in reason, no man should possess him
with any appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it,
should dishearten his army.

BATES  He may show what outward courage he will,
but I believe, as cold a night as 'tis, he could wish
himself in Thames up to the neck; and so I would
he were, and I by him, at all adventures, so we were
quit here.

KING HENRY  By my troth, I will speak my conscience
of the King. I think he would not wish himself
anywhere but where he is.

BATES  Then I would he were here alone; so should he
be sure to be ransomed, and a many poor men's
lives saved.

KING HENRY  I dare say you love him not so ill to wish
him here alone, howsoever you speak this to feel
other men's minds. Methinks I could not die anywhere
so contented as in the King's company, his
cause being just and his quarrel honorable.

WILLIAMS  That's more than we know.

BATES  Ay, or more than we should seek after, for we
know enough if we know we are the King's subjects.
If his cause be wrong, our obedience to the
King wipes the crime of it out of us.

WILLIAMS  But if the cause be not good, the King
himself hath a heavy reckoning to make, when all
those legs and arms and heads, chopped off in a
battle, shall join together at the latter day, and cry
all "We died at such a place," some swearing, some
crying for a surgeon, some upon their wives left
poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe,
some upon their children rawly left. I am afeard
there are few die well that die in a battle, for how
can they charitably dispose of anything when blood
is their argument? Now, if these men do not die
well, it will be a black matter for the king that led
them to it, who to disobey were against all proportion
of subjection.

KING HENRY  So, if a son that is by his father sent about
merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea,
the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule,
should be imposed upon his father that sent him.
Or if a servant, under his master's command transporting
a sum of money, be assailed by robbers and
die in many irreconciled iniquities, you may call the
business of the master the author of the servant's
damnation. But this is not so. The King is not bound
to answer the particular endings of his soldiers, the
father of his son, nor the master of his servant, for
they purpose not their death when they purpose
their services. Besides, there is no king, be his cause
never so spotless, if it come to the arbitrament of
swords, can try it out with all unspotted soldiers.
Some, peradventure, have on them the guilt of
premeditated and contrived murder; some, of beguiling
virgins with the broken seals of perjury;
some, making the wars their bulwark, that have
before gored the gentle bosom of peace with pillage
and robbery. Now, if these men have defeated the
law and outrun native punishment, though they can
outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from God.
War is His beadle, war is His vengeance, so that here
men are punished for before-breach of the King's
laws in now the King's quarrel. Where they feared
the death, they have borne life away; and where they
would be safe, they perish. Then, if they die unprovided,
no more is the King guilty of their damnation
than he was before guilty of those impieties for the
which they are now visited. Every subject's duty is
the King's, but every subject's soul is his own.
Therefore should every soldier in the wars do as
every sick man in his bed: wash every mote out of
his conscience. And, dying so, death is to him
advantage; or not dying, the time was blessedly lost
wherein such preparation was gained. And in him
that escapes, it were not sin to think that, making
God so free an offer, He let him outlive that day to
see His greatness and to teach others how they
should prepare.

WILLIAMS  'Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill
upon his own head; the King is not to answer it.

BATES  I do not desire he should answer for me, and yet
I determine to fight lustily for him.

KING HENRY  I myself heard the King say he would not
be ransomed.

WILLIAMS  Ay, he said so to make us fight cheerfully,
but when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed
and we ne'er the wiser.

KING HENRY  If I live to see it, I will never trust his
word after.

WILLIAMS  You pay him then. That's a perilous shot out
of an elder gun, that a poor and a private displeasure
can do against a monarch. You may as well go
about to turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face
with a peacock's feather. You'll "never trust his
word after." Come, 'tis a foolish saying.

KING HENRY  Your reproof is something too round. I
should be angry with you if the time were
convenient.

WILLIAMS  Let it be a quarrel between us, if you live.

KING HENRY  I embrace it.

WILLIAMS  How shall I know thee again?

KING HENRY  Give me any gage of thine, and I will wear
it in my bonnet. Then, if ever thou dar'st acknowledge
it, I will make it my quarrel.

WILLIAMS  Here's my glove. Give me another of thine.

KING HENRY  There.	[They exchange gloves.]

WILLIAMS  This will I also wear in my cap. If ever thou
come to me and say, after tomorrow, "This is my
glove," by this hand I will take thee a box on the
ear.

KING HENRY  If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it.

WILLIAMS  Thou dar'st as well be hanged.

KING HENRY  Well, I will do it, though I take thee in the
King's company.

WILLIAMS  Keep thy word. Fare thee well.

BATES  Be friends, you English fools, be friends. We
have French quarrels enough, if you could tell how
to reckon.

KING HENRY  Indeed, the French may lay twenty
French crowns to one they will beat us, for they
bear them on their shoulders. But it is no English
treason to cut French crowns, and tomorrow the
King himself will be a clipper.
[Soldiers exit.]
Upon the King! Let us our lives, our souls, our
debts, our careful wives, our children, and our sins,
lay on the King!
We must bear all. O hard condition,
Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath
Of every fool whose sense no more can feel
But his own wringing. What infinite heart's ease
Must kings neglect that private men enjoy?
And what have kings that privates have not too,
Save ceremony, save general ceremony?
And what art thou, thou idol ceremony?
What kind of god art thou that suffer'st more
Of mortal griefs than do thy worshipers?
What are thy rents? What are thy comings-in?
O ceremony, show me but thy worth!
What is thy soul of adoration?
Art thou aught else but place, degree, and form,
Creating awe and fear in other men,
Wherein thou art less happy, being feared,
Than they in fearing?
What drink'st thou oft, instead of homage sweet,
But poisoned flattery? O, be sick, great greatness,
And bid thy ceremony give thee cure!
Think'st thou the fiery fever will go out
With titles blown from adulation?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending?
Canst thou, when thou command'st the beggar's
knee,
Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream,
That play'st so subtly with a king's repose.
I am a king that find thee, and I know
'Tis not the balm, the scepter, and the ball,
The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,
The farced title running 'fore the King,
The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
That beats upon the high shore of this world;
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous ceremony,
Not all these, laid in bed majestical,
Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave
Who, with a body filled and vacant mind,
Gets him to rest, crammed with distressful bread;
Never sees horrid night, the child of hell,
But, like a lackey, from the rise to set
Sweats in the eye of Phoebus, and all night
Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn
Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse,
And follows so the ever-running year
With profitable labor to his grave.
And, but for ceremony, such a wretch,
Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep,
Had the forehand and vantage of a king.
The slave, a member of the country's peace,
Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots
What watch the King keeps to maintain the peace,
Whose hours the peasant best advantages.

[Enter Erpingham.]


ERPINGHAM
My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,
Seek through your camp to find you.

KING HENRY  Good old knight,
Collect them all together at my tent.
I'll be before thee.

ERPINGHAM  I shall do 't, my lord.	[He exits.]

KING HENRY
O God of battles, steel my soldiers' hearts.
Possess them not with fear. Take from them now
The sense of reck'ning or th' opposed numbers
Pluck their hearts from them. Not today, O Lord,
O, not today, think not upon the fault
My father made in compassing the crown.
I Richard's body have interred new
And on it have bestowed more contrite tears
Than from it issued forced drops of blood.
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay
Who twice a day their withered hands hold up
Toward heaven to pardon blood. And I have built
Two chantries where the sad and solemn priests
Sing still for Richard's soul. More will I do--
Though all that I can do is nothing worth,
Since that my penitence comes after all,
Imploring pardon.

[Enter Gloucester.]


GLOUCESTER  My liege.

KING HENRY  My brother Gloucester's voice.--Ay,
I know thy errand. I will go with thee.
The day, my friends, and all things stay for me.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter the Dauphin, Orleans, Rambures, and Beaumont.]


ORLEANS
The sun doth gild our armor. Up, my lords.

DAUPHIN
Montez a cheval! My horse, varlet! Lackey! Ha!

ORLEANS  O brave spirit!

DAUPHIN  Via les eaux et terre.

ORLEANS  Rien puis? L'air et feu?

DAUPHIN  Cieux, cousin Orleans.

[Enter Constable.]

Now, my Lord Constable?

CONSTABLE
Hark how our steeds for present service neigh.

DAUPHIN
Mount them, and make incision in their hides,
That their hot blood may spin in English eyes
And dout them with superfluous courage. Ha!

RAMBURES
What, will you have them weep our horses' blood?
How shall we then behold their natural tears?

[Enter Messenger.]


MESSENGER
The English are embattled, you French peers.

CONSTABLE
To horse, you gallant princes, straight to horse.
Do but behold yond poor and starved band,
And your fair show shall suck away their souls,
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
There is not work enough for all our hands,
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins
To give each naked curtal ax a stain,
That our French gallants shall today draw out
And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on
them,
The vapor of our valor will o'erturn them.
'Tis positive against all exceptions, lords,
That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants,
Who in unnecessary action swarm
About our squares of battle, were enough
To purge this field of such a hilding foe,
Though we upon this mountain's basis by
Took stand for idle speculation,
But that our honors must not. What's to say?
A very little little let us do,
And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound
The tucket sonance and the note to mount,
For our approach shall so much dare the field
That England shall couch down in fear and yield.

[Enter Grandpre.]


GRANDPRE
Why do you stay so long, my lords of France?
Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones,
Ill-favoredly become the morning field.
Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose,
And our air shakes them passing scornfully.
Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggared host
And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps.
The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks
With torch staves in their hand, and their poor jades
Lob down their heads, drooping the hides and hips,
The gum down-roping from their pale dead eyes,
And in their pale dull mouths the gemeled bit
Lies foul with chawed grass, still and motionless.
And their executors, the knavish crows,
Fly o'er them all, impatient for their hour.
Description cannot suit itself in words
To demonstrate the life of such a battle
In life so lifeless, as it shows itself.

CONSTABLE
They have said their prayers, and they stay for death.

DAUPHIN
Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits,
And give their fasting horses provender,
And after fight with them?

CONSTABLE
I stay but for my guard. On, to the field!
I will the banner from a trumpet take
And use it for my haste. Come, come away.
The sun is high, and we outwear the day.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Gloucester, Bedford, Exeter, Erpingham with all
his host, Salisbury, and Westmoreland.]


GLOUCESTER  Where is the King?

BEDFORD
The King himself is rode to view their battle.

WESTMORELAND
Of fighting men they have full threescore thousand.

EXETER
There's five to one. Besides, they all are fresh.

SALISBURY
God's arm strike with us! 'Tis a fearful odds.
God be wi' you, princes all. I'll to my charge.
If we no more meet till we meet in heaven,
Then joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford,
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu.

BEDFORD
Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with
thee.
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,
For thou art framed of the firm truth of valor.

EXETER
Farewell, kind lord. Fight valiantly today.
[Salisbury exits.]

BEDFORD
He is as full of valor as of kindness,
Princely in both.

[Enter the King of England.]


WESTMORELAND  O, that we now had here
But one ten thousand of those men in England
That do no work today.

KING HENRY  What's he that wishes so?
My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin.
If we are marked to die, we are enough
To do our country loss; and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honor.
God's will, I pray thee wish not one man more.
By Jove, I am not covetous for gold,
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost;
It yearns me not if men my garments wear;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires.
But if it be a sin to covet honor,
I am the most offending soul alive.
No, 'faith, my coz, wish not a man from England.
God's peace, I would not lose so great an honor
As one man more, methinks, would share from me,
For the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more!
Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host,
That he which hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart. His passport shall be made,
And crowns for convoy put into his purse.
We would not die in that man's company
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is called the feast of Crispian.
He that outlives this day and comes safe home
Will stand o' tiptoe when this day is named
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall see this day, and live old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbors
And say "Tomorrow is Saint Crispian."
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars.
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,
But he'll remember with advantages
What feats he did that day. Then shall our names,
Familiar in his mouth as household words,
Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered.
This story shall the good man teach his son,
And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be remembered--
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he today that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition;
And gentlemen in England now abed
Shall think themselves accursed they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's day.

[Enter Salisbury.]


SALISBURY
My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed.
The French are bravely in their battles set,
And will with all expedience charge on us.

KING HENRY
All things are ready if our minds be so.

WESTMORELAND
Perish the man whose mind is backward now!

KING HENRY
Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?

WESTMORELAND
God's will, my liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, could fight this royal battle!

KING HENRY
Why, now thou hast unwished five thousand men,
Which likes me better than to wish us one.--
You know your places. God be with you all.

[Tucket. Enter Montjoy.]


MONTJOY
Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry,
If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound,
Before thy most assured overthrow.
For certainly thou art so near the gulf
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy,
The Constable desires thee thou wilt mind
Thy followers of repentance, that their souls
May make a peaceful and a sweet retire
From off these fields where, wretches, their poor
bodies
Must lie and fester.

KING HENRY  Who hath sent thee now?

MONTJOY  The Constable of France.

KING HENRY
I pray thee bear my former answer back.
Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones.
Good God, why should they mock poor fellows
thus?
The man that once did sell the lion's skin
While the beast lived was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find native graves, upon the which, I trust,
Shall witness live in brass of this day's work.
And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
They shall be famed; for there the sun shall greet
them
And draw their honors reeking up to heaven,
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France.
Mark, then, abounding valor in our English,
That being dead, like to the bullet's crazing,
Break out into a second course of mischief,
Killing in relapse of mortality.
Let me speak proudly: tell the Constable
We are but warriors for the working day;
Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirched
With rainy marching in the painful field.
There's not a piece of feather in our host--
Good argument, I hope, we will not fly--
And time hath worn us into slovenry.
But, by the Mass, our hearts are in the trim,
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night
They'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
The gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' heads
And turn them out of service. If they do this,
As, if God please, they shall, my ransom then
Will soon be levied. Herald, save thou thy labor.
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald.
They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints,
Which, if they have, as I will leave 'em them,
Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.

MONTJOY
I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well.
Thou never shalt hear herald anymore.

KING HENRY  I fear thou wilt once more come again
for a ransom.	[Montjoy exits.]
[Enter York.
]

YORK, [kneeling]
My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg
The leading of the vaward.

KING HENRY
Take it, brave York.	[York rises.]
Now, soldiers, march away,
And how Thou pleasest, God, dispose the day.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Alarum. Excursions. Enter Pistol, French Soldier,
and Boy.]


PISTOL  Yield, cur.

FRENCH SOLDIER  Je pense que vous etes le gentilhomme
de bonne qualite.

PISTOL  Qualtitie calmie custure me. Art thou a gentleman?
What is thy name? Discuss.

FRENCH SOLDIER  O Seigneur Dieu!

PISTOL  O, Seigneur Dew should be a gentleman. Perpend
my words, O Seigneur Dew, and mark: O
Seigneur Dew, thou diest on point of fox, except, O
Seigneur, thou do give to me egregious ransom.

FRENCH SOLDIER  O, prenez misericorde! Ayez pitie de
moi!

PISTOL  Moy shall not serve. I will have forty moys, or
I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat in drops of
crimson blood.

FRENCH SOLDIER  Est-il impossible d'echapper la force
de ton bras?

PISTOL  Brass, cur? Thou damned and luxurious
mountain goat, offer'st me brass?

FRENCH SOLDIER  O, pardonnez-moi!

PISTOL  Say'st thou me so? Is that a ton of moys?--
Come hither, boy. Ask me this slave in French what
is his name.

BOY  Ecoutez. Comment etes-vous appele?

FRENCH SOLDIER  Monsieur le Fer.

BOY  He says his name is Master Fer.

PISTOL  Master Fer. I'll fer him, and firk him, and ferret
him. Discuss the same in French unto him.

BOY  I do not know the French for "fer," and "ferret,"
and "firk."

PISTOL  Bid him prepare, for I will cut his throat.

FRENCH SOLDIER, [to the Boy]  Que dit-il, monsieur?

BOY  Il me commande a vous dire que vous faites vous
pret, car ce soldat ici est dispose tout a cette heure de
couper votre gorge.

PISTOL  Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy, peasant, unless
thou give me crowns, brave crowns, or mangled
shalt thou be by this my sword.

FRENCH SOLDIER  O, je vous supplie, pour l'amour de
Dieu, me pardonner. Je suis le gentilhomme de bonne
maison. Gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux
cents ecus.

PISTOL  What are his words?

BOY  He prays you to save his life. He is a gentleman of a
good house, and for his ransom he will give you two
hundred crowns.

PISTOL  Tell him my fury shall abate, and I the crowns
will take.

FRENCH SOLDIER, [to the Boy]  Petit monsieur, que dit-il?

BOY  Encore qu'il est contre son jurement de pardonner
aucun prisonnier; neanmoins, pour les ecus que vous
lui avez promis, il est content a vous donner la liberte,
le franchisement.
[French soldier kneels.]

FRENCH SOLDIER   Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille
remerciments, et je m'estime heureux que j'ai tombe
entre les mains d'un chevalier, je pense, le plus brave,
vaillant, et tres distingue seigneur d'Angleterre.

PISTOL  Expound unto me, boy.

BOY  He gives you upon his knees a thousand thanks,
and he esteems himself happy that he hath fall'n
into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most
brave, valorous, and thrice-worthy seigneur of
England.

PISTOL  As I suck blood, I will some mercy show.
Follow me.

BOY  Suivez-vous le grand capitaine.
[The French Soldier stands up. He and Pistol exit.]
I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty
a heart. But the saying is true: "The empty vessel
makes the greatest sound." Bardolph and Nym had
ten times more valor than this roaring devil i' th' old
play, that everyone may pare his nails with a wooden
dagger, and they are both hanged, and so would
this be if he durst steal anything adventurously. I
must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of our
camp. The French might have a good prey of us if he
knew of it, for there is none to guard it but boys.
[He exits.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Constable, Orleans, Bourbon, Dauphin, and
Rambures.]


CONSTABLE  O diable!

ORLEANS
O Seigneur! Le jour est perdu, tout est perdu!

DAUPHIN
Mort de ma vie, all is confounded, all!
Reproach and everlasting shame
Sits mocking in our plumes.	[A short Alarum.]
O mechante Fortune!
Do not run away.

CONSTABLE  Why, all our ranks are broke.

DAUPHIN
O perdurable shame! Let's stab ourselves.
Be these the wretches that we played at dice for?

ORLEANS
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?

BOURBON
Shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame!
Let us die. In once more! Back again!
And he that will not follow Bourbon now,
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand
Like a base pander hold the chamber door,
Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog,
His fairest daughter is contaminate.

CONSTABLE
Disorder, that hath spoiled us, friend us now.
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.

ORLEANS
We are enough yet living in the field
To smother up the English in our throngs,
If any order might be thought upon.

BOURBON
The devil take order now! I'll to the throng.
Let life be short, else shame will be too long.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Alarum. Enter the King of England and his train,
with prisoners.]


KING HENRY
Well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen,
But all's not done. Yet keep the French the field.

[Enter Exeter.]


EXETER
The Duke of York commends him to your Majesty.

KING HENRY
Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hour
I saw him down, thrice up again and fighting.
From helmet to the spur, all blood he was.

EXETER
In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie,
Larding the plain, and by his bloody side,
Yoke-fellow to his honor-owing wounds,
The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
Suffolk first died, and York, all haggled over,
Comes to him where in gore he lay insteeped,
And takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes
That bloodily did yawn upon his face.
He cries aloud "Tarry, my cousin Suffolk.
My soul shall thine keep company to heaven.
Tarry, sweet soul, for mine; then fly abreast,
As in this glorious and well-foughten field
We kept together in our chivalry."
Upon these words I came and cheered him up.
He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand,
And with a feeble grip, says "Dear my lord,
Commend my service to my sovereign."
So did he turn, and over Suffolk's neck
He threw his wounded arm and kissed his lips,
And so, espoused to death, with blood he sealed
A testament of noble-ending love.
The pretty and sweet manner of it forced
Those waters from me which I would have stopped,
But I had not so much of man in me,
And all my mother came into mine eyes
And gave me up to tears.

KING HENRY  I blame you not,
For, hearing this, I must perforce compound
With my full eyes, or they will issue too.	[Alarum.]
But hark, what new alarum is this same?
The French have reinforced their scattered men.
Then every soldier kill his prisoners.
Give the word through.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Fluellen and Gower.]


FLUELLEN  Kill the poys and the luggage! 'Tis expressly
against the law of arms. 'Tis as arrant a piece of
knavery, mark you now, as can be offert, in your
conscience now, is it not?

GOWER  'Tis certain there's not a boy left alive, and
the cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha'
done this slaughter. Besides, they have burned
and carried away all that was in the King's tent,
wherefore the King, most worthily, hath caused
every soldier to cut his prisoner's throat. O, 'tis a
gallant king!

FLUELLEN  Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain
Gower. What call you the town's name where
Alexander the Pig was born?

GOWER  Alexander the Great.

FLUELLEN  Why, I pray you, is not "pig" great? The pig,
or the great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the
magnanimous, are all one reckonings, save the
phrase is a little variations.

GOWER  I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon.
His father was called Philip of Macedon, as I
take it.

FLUELLEN  I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is
porn. I tell you, captain, if you look in the maps of
the 'orld, I warrant you sall find, in the comparisons
between Macedon and Monmouth, that the
situations, look you, is both alike. There is a river in
Macedon, and there is also, moreover, a river at
Monmouth. It is called Wye at Monmouth, but it is
out of my prains what is the name of the other river.
But 'tis all one; 'tis alike as my fingers is to my
fingers, and there is salmons in both. If you mark
Alexander's life well, Harry of Monmouth's life is
come after it indifferent well, for there is figures in
all things. Alexander, God knows and you know, in
his rages and his furies and his wraths and his
cholers and his moods and his displeasures and his
indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in
his prains, did, in his ales and his angers, look you,
kill his best friend, Cleitus.

GOWER  Our king is not like him in that. He never
killed any of his friends.

FLUELLEN  It is not well done, mark you now, to take
the tales out of my mouth ere it is made and
finished. I speak but in the figures and comparisons
of it. As Alexander killed his friend Cleitus, being in
his ales and his cups, so also Harry Monmouth,
being in his right wits and his good judgments,
turned away the fat knight with the great-belly
doublet; he was full of jests and gipes and knaveries
and mocks--I have forgot his name.

GOWER  Sir John Falstaff.

FLUELLEN  That is he. I'll tell you, there is good men
porn at Monmouth.

GOWER  Here comes his Majesty.

[Alarum. Enter King Harry, Exeter, Warwick, Gloucester,
Heralds and Bourbon with other prisoners. Flourish.]


KING HENRY
I was not angry since I came to France
Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald.
Ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill.
If they will fight with us, bid them come down,
Or void the field. They do offend our sight.
If they'll do neither, we will come to them
And make them skirr away as swift as stones
Enforced from the old Assyrian slings.
Besides, we'll cut the throats of those we have,
And not a man of them that we shall take
Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.

[Enter Montjoy.]


EXETER
Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.

GLOUCESTER
His eyes are humbler than they used to be.

KING HENRY
How now, what means this, herald? Know'st thou
not
That I have fined these bones of mine for ransom?
Com'st thou again for ransom?

MONTJOY  No, great king.
I come to thee for charitable license,
That we may wander o'er this bloody field
To book our dead and then to bury them,
To sort our nobles from our common men,
For many of our princes--woe the while!--
Lie drowned and soaked in mercenary blood.
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
In blood of princes, and the wounded steeds
Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage
Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
Killing them twice. O, give us leave, great king,
To view the field in safety and dispose
Of their dead bodies.

KING HENRY  I tell thee truly, herald,
I know not if the day be ours or no,
For yet a many of your horsemen peer
And gallop o'er the field.

MONTJOY  The day is yours.

KING HENRY
Praised be God, and not our strength, for it!
What is this castle called that stands hard by?

MONTJOY  They call it Agincourt.

KING HENRY
Then call we this the field of Agincourt,
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.

FLUELLEN  Your grandfather of famous memory, an 't
please your Majesty, and your great-uncle Edward
the Plack Prince of Wales, as I have read in the
chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in
France.

KING HENRY  They did, Fluellen.

FLUELLEN  Your Majesty says very true. If your Majesties
is remembered of it, the Welshmen did good
service in a garden where leeks did grow, wearing
leeks in their Monmouth caps, which, your Majesty
know, to this hour is an honorable badge of the
service. And I do believe your Majesty takes no
scorn to wear the leek upon Saint Tavy's day.

KING HENRY
I wear it for a memorable honor,
For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.

FLUELLEN  All the water in Wye cannot wash your
Majesty's Welsh plood out of your pody, I can tell
you that. God pless it and preserve it as long as it
pleases his Grace and his Majesty too.

KING HENRY  Thanks, good my countryman.

FLUELLEN  By Jeshu, I am your Majesty's countryman,
I care not who know it. I will confess it to all the
'orld. I need not to be ashamed of your Majesty,
praised be God, so long as your Majesty is an
honest man.

KING HENRY
God keep me so.--Our heralds, go with him.
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
On both our parts.
[Montjoy, English Heralds, and Gower exit.]

[Enter Williams.]

Call yonder fellow hither.

EXETER  Soldier, you must come to the King.

KING HENRY  Soldier, why wear'st thou that glove in thy
cap?

WILLIAMS  An 't please your Majesty, 'tis the gage of
one that I should fight withal, if he be alive.

KING HENRY  An Englishman?

WILLIAMS  An 't please your Majesty, a rascal that
swaggered with me last night, who, if alive and ever
dare to challenge this glove, I have sworn to take
him a box o' th' ear, or if I can see my glove in his
cap, which he swore, as he was a soldier, he would
wear if alive, I will strike it out soundly.

KING HENRY  What think you, Captain Fluellen, is it fit
this soldier keep his oath?

FLUELLEN  He is a craven and a villain else, an 't
please your Majesty, in my conscience.

KING HENRY  It may be his enemy is a gentleman of
great sort, quite from the answer of his degree.

FLUELLEN  Though he be as good a gentleman as the
devil is, as Lucifer and Beelzebub himself, it is
necessary, look your Grace, that he keep his vow
and his oath. If he be perjured, see you now, his
reputation is as arrant a villain and a Jack Sauce as
ever his black shoe trod upon God's ground and His
earth, in my conscience, la.

KING HENRY  Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou
meet'st the fellow.

WILLIAMS  So I will, my liege, as I live.

KING HENRY  Who serv'st thou under?

WILLIAMS  Under Captain Gower, my liege.

FLUELLEN  Gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge
and literatured in the wars.

KING HENRY  Call him hither to me, soldier.

WILLIAMS  I will, my liege.	[He exits.]

KING HENRY, [giving Fluellen Williams's glove]  Here,
Fluellen, wear thou this favor for me, and stick it in
thy cap. When Alencon and myself were down
together, I plucked this glove from his helm. If any
man challenge this, he is a friend to Alencon and an
enemy to our person. If thou encounter any such,
apprehend him, an thou dost me love.

FLUELLEN, [putting the glove in his cap]  Your Grace
does me as great honors as can be desired in the
hearts of his subjects. I would fain see the man that
has but two legs that shall find himself aggriefed at
this glove, that is all; but I would fain see it once, an
please God of His grace that I might see.

KING HENRY  Know'st thou Gower?

FLUELLEN  He is my dear friend, an please you.

KING HENRY  Pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to
my tent.

FLUELLEN  I will fetch him.	[He exits.]

KING HENRY
My Lord of Warwick and my brother Gloucester,
Follow Fluellen closely at the heels.
The glove which I have given him for a favor
May haply purchase him a box o' th' ear.
It is the soldier's. I by bargain should
Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin Warwick.
If that the soldier strike him, as I judge
By his blunt bearing he will keep his word,
Some sudden mischief may arise of it,
For I do know Fluellen valiant
And, touched with choler, hot as gunpowder,
And quickly will return an injury.
Follow, and see there be no harm between them.--
Go you with me, uncle of Exeter.
[They exit.]

Scene 8
=======
[Enter Gower and Williams.]


WILLIAMS  I warrant it is to knight you, captain.

[Enter Fluellen, wearing Williams's glove.]


FLUELLEN, [to Gower]  God's will and His pleasure,
captain, I beseech you now, come apace to the
King. There is more good toward you peradventure
than is in your knowledge to dream of.

WILLIAMS, [to Fluellen, pointing to the glove in his own
hat]  Sir, know you this glove?

FLUELLEN  Know the glove? I know the glove is a glove.

WILLIAMS  I know this, and thus I challenge it.
[Strikes him.]

FLUELLEN  'Sblood, an arrant traitor as any 's in the
universal world, or in France, or in England!

GOWER, [to Williams]  How now, sir? You villain!

WILLIAMS  Do you think I'll be forsworn?

FLUELLEN  Stand away, Captain Gower. I will give treason
his payment into plows, I warrant you.

WILLIAMS  I am no traitor.

FLUELLEN  That's a lie in thy throat.--I charge you in
his Majesty's name, apprehend him. He's a friend
of the Duke Alencon's.

[Enter Warwick and Gloucester.]


WARWICK  How now, how now, what's the matter?

FLUELLEN  My Lord of Warwick, here is, praised be
God for it, a most contagious treason come to
light, look you, as you shall desire in a summer's
day.

[Enter King of England and Exeter.]

Here is his Majesty.

KING HENRY  How now, what's the matter?

FLUELLEN  My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that,
look your Grace, has struck the glove which your
Majesty is take out of the helmet of Alencon.

WILLIAMS  My liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow
of it. And he that I gave it to in change promised to
wear it in his cap. I promised to strike him if he did.
I met this man with my glove in his cap, and I have
been as good as my word.

FLUELLEN  Your Majesty, hear now, saving your Majesty's
manhood, what an arrant, rascally, beggarly,
lousy knave it is. I hope your Majesty is pear me
testimony and witness and will avouchment that
this is the glove of Alencon that your Majesty is give
me, in your conscience now.

KING HENRY, [to Williams]  Give me thy glove, soldier.
Look, here is the fellow of it.
'Twas I indeed thou promised'st to strike,
And thou hast given me most bitter terms.

FLUELLEN  An please your Majesty, let his neck answer
for it, if there is any martial law in the world.

KING HENRY, [to Williams]  How canst thou make me
satisfaction?

WILLIAMS  All offenses, my lord, come from the heart.
Never came any from mine that might offend your
Majesty.

KING HENRY  It was ourself thou didst abuse.

WILLIAMS  Your Majesty came not like yourself. You
appeared to me but as a common man; witness the
night, your garments, your lowliness. And what
your Highness suffered under that shape, I beseech
you take it for your own fault and not mine, for, had
you been as I took you for, I made no offense.
Therefore, I beseech your Highness pardon me.

KING HENRY
Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns
And give it to this fellow.--Keep it, fellow,
And wear it for an honor in thy cap
Till I do challenge it.--Give him the crowns.--
And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.

FLUELLEN  By this day and this light, the fellow has
mettle enough in his belly.--Hold, there is twelvepence
for you, and I pray you to serve God and keep
you out of prawls and prabbles and quarrels and
dissensions, and I warrant you it is the better for
you.

WILLIAMS  I will none of your money.

FLUELLEN  It is with a good will. I can tell you it will
serve you to mend your shoes. Come, wherefore
should you be so pashful? Your shoes is not so
good. 'Tis a good silling, I warrant you, or I will
change it.

[Enter an English Herald.]


KING HENRY  Now, herald, are the dead numbered?

HERALD, [giving the King a paper]
Here is the number of the slaughtered French.

KING HENRY, [to Exeter]
What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?

EXETER
Charles, Duke of Orleans, nephew to the King;
John, Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bouciqualt.
Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.

KING HENRY
This note doth tell me of ten thousand French
That in the field lie slain. Of princes in this number
And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead
One hundred twenty-six. Added to these,
Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
Eight thousand and four hundred, of the which
Five hundred were but yesterday dubbed knights.
So that in these ten thousand they have lost,
There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries.
The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires,
And gentlemen of blood and quality.
The names of those their nobles that lie dead:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;
Jacques of Chatillon, Admiral of France;
The Master of the Crossbows, Lord Rambures;
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard
Dauphin;
John, Duke of Alencon; Anthony, Duke of Brabant,
The brother to the Duke of Burgundy;
And Edward, Duke of Bar. Of lusty earls:
Grandpre and Roussi, Faulconbridge and Foix,
Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale.
Here was a royal fellowship of death.
Where is the number of our English dead?
[Herald gives him another paper.]
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire;
None else of name, and of all other men
But five and twenty. O God, thy arm was here,
And not to us, but to thy arm alone
Ascribe we all! When, without stratagem,
But in plain shock and even play of battle,
Was ever known so great and little loss
On one part and on th' other? Take it, God,
For it is none but thine.

EXETER  'Tis wonderful.

KING HENRY
Come, go we in procession to the village,
And be it death proclaimed through our host
To boast of this or take that praise from God
Which is His only.

FLUELLEN  Is it not lawful, an please your Majesty, to
tell how many is killed?

KING HENRY
Yes, captain, but with this acknowledgment:
That God fought for us.

FLUELLEN  Yes, my conscience, He did us great good.

KING HENRY  Do we all holy rites.
Let there be sung Non nobis, and Te Deum,
The dead with charity enclosed in clay,
And then to Calais, and to England then,
Where ne'er from France arrived more happy men.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

[Enter Chorus.]


CHORUS
Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story
That I may prompt them; and of such as have,
I humbly pray them to admit th' excuse
Of time, of numbers, and due course of things,
Which cannot in their huge and proper life
Be here presented. Now we bear the King
Toward Calais. Grant him there. There seen,
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts
Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach
Pales in the flood with men, wives, and boys,
Whose shouts and claps outvoice the deep-mouthed
sea,
Which, like a mighty whiffler 'fore the King
Seems to prepare his way. So let him land,
And solemnly see him set on to London.
So swift a pace hath thought that even now
You may imagine him upon Blackheath,
Where that his lords desire him to have borne
His bruised helmet and his bended sword
Before him through the city. He forbids it,
Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride,
Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent
Quite from himself, to God. But now behold,
In the quick forge and workinghouse of thought,
How London doth pour out her citizens.
The Mayor and all his brethren in best sort,
Like to the senators of th' antique Rome,
With the plebeians swarming at their heels,
Go forth and fetch their conqu'ring Caesar in--
As, by a lower but by loving likelihood
Were now the general of our gracious empress,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing rebellion broached on his sword,
How many would the peaceful city quit
To welcome him! Much more, and much more
cause,
Did they this Harry. Now in London place him
(As yet the lamentation of the French
Invites the King of England's stay at home;
The Emperor's coming in behalf of France
To order peace between them) and omit
All the occurrences, whatever chanced,
Till Harry's back return again to France.
There must we bring him, and myself have played
The interim, by remembering you 'tis past.
Then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance
After your thoughts, straight back again to France.
[He exits.]

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Fluellen and Gower.]


GOWER  Nay, that's right. But why wear you your leek
today? Saint Davy's day is past.

FLUELLEN  There is occasions and causes why and
wherefore in all things. I will tell you ass my
friend, Captain Gower. The rascally, scald, beggarly,
lousy, pragging knave Pistol, which you and
yourself and all the world know to be no petter than
a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is come to
me and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look
you, and bid me eat my leek. It was in a place where
I could not breed no contention with him, but I will
be so bold as to wear it in my cap till I see him once
again, and then I will tell him a little piece of my
desires.

[Enter Pistol.]


GOWER  Why here he comes, swelling like a
turkey-cock.

FLUELLEN  'Tis no matter for his swellings, nor his
turkey-cocks.--God pless you, Aunchient Pistol,
you scurvy, lousy knave, God pless you.

PISTOL  Ha, art thou bedlam? Dost thou thirst, base
Trojan, to have me fold up Parca's fatal web? Hence.
I am qualmish at the smell of leek.

FLUELLEN  I peseech you heartily, scurvy, lousy knave,
at my desires and my requests and my petitions, to
eat, look you, this leek. Because, look you, you do
not love it, nor your affections and your appetites
and your disgestions does not agree with it, I would
desire you to eat it.

PISTOL  Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.

FLUELLEN  There is one goat for you. [(Strikes him
with a cudgel.)] Will you be so good, scald knave,
as eat it?

PISTOL  Base Trojan, thou shalt die.

FLUELLEN  You say very true, scald knave, when God's
will is. I will desire you to live in the meantime and
eat your victuals. Come, there is sauce for it. [Strikes
him.] You called me yesterday "mountain squire,"
but I will make you today a squire of low degree. I
pray you, fall to. If you can mock a leek, you can eat
a leek.

GOWER  Enough, captain. You have astonished him.

FLUELLEN  I say I will make him eat some part of my
leek, or I will peat his pate four days.--Bite, I pray
you. It is good for your green wound and your
ploody coxcomb.

PISTOL  Must I bite?

FLUELLEN  Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of
question, too, and ambiguities.

PISTOL  By this leek, I will most horribly revenge.
[Fluellen threatens him.] I eat and eat, I swear--

FLUELLEN  Eat, I pray you. Will you have some more
sauce to your leek? There is not enough leek to
swear by.

PISTOL  Quiet thy cudgel. Thou dost see I eat.

FLUELLEN  Much good do you, scald knave, heartily.
Nay, pray you throw none away. The skin is good for
your broken coxcomb. When you take occasions to
see leeks hereafter, I pray you mock at 'em, that is
all.

PISTOL  Good.

FLUELLEN  Ay, leeks is good. Hold you, there is a groat
to heal your pate.

PISTOL  Me, a groat?

FLUELLEN  Yes, verily, and in truth you shall take it, or I
have another leek in my pocket, which you shall
eat.

PISTOL  I take thy groat in earnest of revenge.

FLUELLEN  If I owe you anything, I will pay you in
cudgels. You shall be a woodmonger and buy
nothing of me but cudgels. God be wi' you and
keep you and heal your pate.	[He exits.]

PISTOL  All hell shall stir for this.

GOWER  Go, go. You are a counterfeit cowardly knave.
Will you mock at an ancient tradition begun upon
an honorable respect and worn as a memorable
trophy of predeceased valor, and dare not avouch in
your deeds any of your words? I have seen you
gleeking and galling at this gentleman twice or
thrice. You thought because he could not speak
English in the native garb, he could not therefore
handle an English cudgel. You find it otherwise, and
henceforth let a Welsh correction teach you a good
English condition. Fare you well.	[He exits.]

PISTOL  Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?
News have I that my Doll is dead i' th' spital of a
malady of France, and there my rendezvous is quite
cut off. Old I do wax, and from my weary limbs
honor is cudgeled. Well, bawd I'll turn, and something
lean to cutpurse of quick hand. To England
will I steal, and there I'll steal.
And patches will I get unto these cudgeled scars,
And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter at one door, King Henry, Exeter, Bedford,
Warwick, Westmoreland, and other Lords. At another,
Queen Isabel of France, the King of France, the
Princess Katherine and Alice, the Duke of Burgundy,
and other French.]


KING HENRY
Peace to this meeting wherefor we are met.
Unto our brother France and to our sister,
Health and fair time of day.--Joy and good wishes
To our most fair and princely cousin Katherine.--
And, as a branch and member of this royalty,
By whom this great assembly is contrived,
We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy.--
And princes French, and peers, health to you all.

KING OF FRANCE
Right joyous are we to behold your face,
Most worthy brother England. Fairly met.--
So are you, princes English, every one.

QUEEN OF FRANCE
So happy be the issue, brother Ireland,
Of this good day and of this gracious meeting,
As we are now glad to behold your eyes--
Your eyes which hitherto have borne in them
Against the French that met them in their bent
The fatal balls of murdering basilisks.
The venom of such looks, we fairly hope,
Have lost their quality, and that this day
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.

KING HENRY
To cry "Amen" to that, thus we appear.

QUEEN OF FRANCE
You English princes all, I do salute you.

BURGUNDY
My duty to you both, on equal love,
Great kings of France and England. That I have
labored
With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavors
To bring your most imperial Majesties
Unto this bar and royal interview,
Your Mightiness on both parts best can witness.
Since, then, my office hath so far prevailed
That face to face and royal eye to eye
You have congreeted, let it not disgrace me
If I demand before this royal view
What rub or what impediment there is
Why that the naked, poor, and mangled peace,
Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births,
Should not in this best garden of the world,
Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage?
Alas, she hath from France too long been chased,
And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,
Corrupting in its own fertility.
Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
Unpruned, dies. Her hedges, even-pleached,
Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair,
Put forth disordered twigs. Her fallow leas
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory
Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts
That should deracinate such savagery.
The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
The freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover,
Wanting the scythe, withal uncorrected, rank,
Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems
But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burrs,
Losing both beauty and utility.
And all our vineyards, fallows, meads, and hedges,
Defective in their natures, grow to wildness.
Even so our houses and ourselves and children
Have lost, or do not learn for want of time,
The sciences that should become our country,
But grow like savages, as soldiers will
That nothing do but meditate on blood,
To swearing and stern looks, diffused attire,
And everything that seems unnatural.
Which to reduce into our former favor
You are assembled, and my speech entreats
That I may know the let why gentle peace
Should not expel these inconveniences
And bless us with her former qualities.

KING HENRY
If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace,
Whose want gives growth to th' imperfections
Which you have cited, you must buy that peace
With full accord to all our just demands,
Whose tenors and particular effects
You have, enscheduled briefly, in your hands.

BURGUNDY
The King hath heard them, to the which as yet
There is no answer made.

KING HENRY
Well then, the peace which you before so urged
Lies in his answer.

KING OF FRANCE
I have but with a cursitory eye
O'erglanced the articles. Pleaseth your Grace
To appoint some of your council presently
To sit with us once more with better heed
To resurvey them, we will suddenly
Pass our accept and peremptory answer.

KING HENRY
Brother, we shall.--Go, uncle Exeter,
And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,
Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King,
And take with you free power to ratify,
Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best
Shall see advantageable for our dignity,
Anything in or out of our demands,
And we'll consign thereto.--Will you, fair sister,
Go with the princes or stay here with us?

QUEEN OF FRANCE
Our gracious brother, I will go with them.
Haply a woman's voice may do some good
When articles too nicely urged be stood on.

KING HENRY
Yet leave our cousin Katherine here with us.
She is our capital demand, comprised
Within the forerank of our articles.

QUEEN OF FRANCE
She hath good leave.
[All but Katherine, and the King of England,
and Alice exit.]

KING HENRY  Fair Katherine, and most fair,
Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms
Such as will enter at a lady's ear
And plead his love-suit to her gentle heart?

KATHERINE  Your Majesty shall mock at me. I cannot
speak your England.

KING HENRY  O fair Katherine, if you will love me
soundly with your French heart, I will be glad to
hear you confess it brokenly with your English
tongue. Do you like me, Kate?

KATHERINE  Pardonnez-moi, I cannot tell wat is "like
me."

KING HENRY  An angel is like you, Kate, and you are
like an angel.

KATHERINE, [to Alice]  Que dit-il? Que je suis semblable a
les anges?

ALICE  Oui, vraiment, sauf votre Grace, ainsi dit-il.

KING HENRY  I said so, dear Katherine, and I must not
blush to affirm it.

KATHERINE  O bon Dieu, les langues des hommes sont
pleines de tromperies.

KING HENRY, [to Alice]  What says she, fair one? That the
tongues of men are full of deceits?

ALICE  Oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of
deceits; dat is de Princess.

KING HENRY  The Princess is the better Englishwoman.--
I' faith, Kate, my wooing is fit for thy
understanding. I am glad thou canst speak no
better English, for if thou couldst, thou wouldst
find me such a plain king that thou wouldst think I
had sold my farm to buy my crown. I know no ways
to mince it in love, but directly to say "I love you."
Then if you urge me farther than to say "Do you, in
faith?" I wear out my suit. Give me your answer, i'
faith, do; and so clap hands and a bargain. How say
you, lady?

KATHERINE  Sauf votre honneur, me understand well.

KING HENRY  Marry, if you would put me to verses or
to dance for your sake, Kate, why you undid me.
For the one, I have neither words nor measure; and
for the other, I have no strength in measure, yet a
reasonable measure in strength. If I could win a
lady at leapfrog or by vaulting into my saddle with
my armor on my back, under the correction of
bragging be it spoken, I should quickly leap into a
wife. Or if I might buffet for my love, or bound my
horse for her favors, I could lay on like a butcher
and sit like a jackanapes, never off. But, before God,
Kate, I cannot look greenly nor gasp out my eloquence,
nor I have no cunning in protestation, only
downright oaths, which I never use till urged, nor
never break for urging. If thou canst love a fellow of
this temper, Kate, whose face is not worth sun-burning,
that never looks in his glass for love of
anything he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook. I
speak to thee plain soldier. If thou canst love me for
this, take me. If not, to say to thee that I shall die is
true, but for thy love, by the Lord, no. Yet I love thee
too. And while thou liv'st, dear Kate, take a fellow of
plain and uncoined constancy, for he perforce must
do thee right because he hath not the gift to woo in
other places. For these fellows of infinite tongue,
that can rhyme themselves into ladies' favors, they
do always reason themselves out again. What? A
speaker is but a prater, a rhyme is but a ballad, a
good leg will fall, a straight back will stoop, a black
beard will turn white, a curled pate will grow bald,
a fair face will wither, a full eye will wax hollow, but
a good heart, Kate, is the sun and the moon, or
rather the sun and not the moon, for it shines bright
and never changes but keeps his course truly. If
thou would have such a one, take me. And take me,
take a soldier. Take a soldier, take a king. And what
say'st thou then to my love? Speak, my fair, and
fairly, I pray thee.

KATHERINE  Is it possible dat I sould love de enemy of
France?

KING HENRY  No, it is not possible you should love the
enemy of France, Kate. But, in loving me, you
should love the friend of France, for I love France
so well that I will not part with a village of it. I will
have it all mine. And, Kate, when France is mine
and I am yours, then yours is France and you are
mine.

KATHERINE  I cannot tell wat is dat.

KING HENRY  No, Kate? I will tell thee in French,
which I am sure will hang upon my tongue like a
new-married wife about her husband's neck, hardly
to be shook off. Je quand sur le possession de
France, et quand vous avez le possession de moi--let
me see, what then? Saint Denis be my speed!--donc
votre est France, et vous etes mienne. It is as easy for
me, Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so
much more French. I shall never move thee in
French, unless it be to laugh at me.

KATHERINE  Sauf votre honneur, le francais que vous
parlez, il est meilleur que l'anglais lequel je parle.

KING HENRY  No, faith, is 't not, Kate, but thy speaking
of my tongue, and I thine, most truly-falsely must
needs be granted to be much at one. But, Kate, dost
thou understand thus much English? Canst thou
love me?

KATHERINE  I cannot tell.

KING HENRY  Can any of your neighbors tell, Kate? I'll
ask them. Come, I know thou lovest me; and at
night, when you come into your closet, you'll question
this gentlewoman about me, and, I know, Kate,
you will, to her, dispraise those parts in me that you
love with your heart. But, good Kate, mock me
mercifully, the rather, gentle princess, because I
love thee cruelly. If ever thou beest mine, Kate, as I
have a saving faith within me tells me thou shalt, I
get thee with scambling, and thou must therefore
needs prove a good soldier-breeder. Shall not thou
and I, between Saint Denis and Saint George, compound
a boy, half French, half English, that shall go
to Constantinople and take the Turk by the beard?
Shall we not? What say'st thou, my fair flower de
luce?

KATHERINE  I do not know dat.

KING HENRY  No, 'tis hereafter to know, but now to
promise. Do but now promise, Kate, you will
endeavor for your French part of such a boy; and
for my English moiety, take the word of a king and
a bachelor. How answer you, la plus belle Katherine
du monde, mon tres cher et divin deesse?

KATHERINE  Your Majeste 'ave fausse French enough to
deceive de most sage demoiselle dat is en France.

KING HENRY  Now fie upon my false French. By mine
honor, in true English, I love thee, Kate. By which
honor I dare not swear thou lovest me, yet my blood
begins to flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding
the poor and untempering effect of my visage. Now
beshrew my father's ambition! He was thinking of
civil wars when he got me; therefore was I created
with a stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that
when I come to woo ladies, I fright them. But, in
faith, Kate, the elder I wax, the better I shall appear.
My comfort is that old age, that ill layer-up of
beauty, can do no more spoil upon my face. Thou
hast me, if thou hast me, at the worst, and thou shalt
wear me, if thou wear me, better and better. And
therefore tell me, most fair Katherine, will you have
me? Put off your maiden blushes, avouch the
thoughts of your heart with the looks of an empress,
take me by the hand, and say "Harry of England, I
am thine," which word thou shalt no sooner bless
mine ear withal, but I will tell thee aloud "England
is thine, Ireland is thine, France is thine, and Henry
Plantagenet is thine," who, though I speak it before
his face, if he be not fellow with the best king, thou
shalt find the best king of good fellows. Come, your
answer in broken music, for thy voice is music, and
thy English broken. Therefore, queen of all, Katherine,
break thy mind to me in broken English. Wilt
thou have me?

KATHERINE  Dat is as it shall please de roi mon pere.

KING HENRY  Nay, it will please him well, Kate; it shall
please him, Kate.

KATHERINE  Den it sall also content me.

KING HENRY  Upon that I kiss your hand, and I call you
my queen.

KATHERINE  Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez! Ma
foi, je ne veux point que vous abaissiez votre grandeur,
en baisant la main d' une--Notre Seigneur!--
indigne serviteur. Excusez-moi, je vous supplie, mon
tres puissant seigneur.

KING HENRY  Then I will kiss your lips, Kate.

KATHERINE  Les dames et demoiselles, pour etre baisees
devant leurs noces, il n'est pas la coutume de France.

KING HENRY  Madam my interpreter, what says she?

ALICE  Dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies of
France--I cannot tell wat is baiser en Anglish.

KING HENRY  To kiss.

ALICE  Your Majeste entendre bettre que moi.

KING HENRY  It is not a fashion for the maids in France
to kiss before they are married, would she say?

ALICE  Oui, vraiment.

KING HENRY  O Kate, nice customs curtsy to great
kings. Dear Kate, you and I cannot be confined
within the weak list of a country's fashion. We are
the makers of manners, Kate, and the liberty that
follows our places stops the mouth of all find-faults,
as I will do yours for upholding the nice fashion of
your country in denying me a kiss. Therefore,
patiently and yielding. [He kisses her.] You have
witchcraft in your lips, Kate. There is more eloquence
in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues
of the French council, and they should sooner
persuade Harry of England than a general petition
of monarchs.

[Enter the French power, the French King and Queen
and Burgundy, and the English Lords Westmoreland
and Exeter.]
Here comes your father.

BURGUNDY  God save your Majesty. My royal cousin,
teach you our princess English?

KING HENRY  I would have her learn, my fair cousin,
how perfectly I love her, and that is good English.

BURGUNDY  Is she not apt?

KING HENRY  Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition
is not smooth, so that, having neither the voice
nor the heart of flattery about me, I cannot so
conjure up the spirit of love in her that he will
appear in his true likeness.

BURGUNDY  Pardon the frankness of my mirth if I
answer you for that. If you would conjure in her,
you must make a circle; if conjure up Love in her in
his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind.
Can you blame her, then, being a maid yet rosed
over with the virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny
the appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked
seeing self? It were, my lord, a hard condition for a
maid to consign to.

KING HENRY  Yet they do wink and yield, as love is
blind and enforces.

BURGUNDY  They are then excused, my lord, when they
see not what they do.

KING HENRY  Then, good my lord, teach your cousin to
consent winking.

BURGUNDY  I will wink on her to consent, my lord, if
you will teach her to know my meaning, for maids
well summered and warm kept are like flies at
Bartholomew-tide: blind, though they have their
eyes; and then they will endure handling, which
before would not abide looking on.

KING HENRY  This moral ties me over to time and a hot
summer. And so I shall catch the fly, your cousin,
in the latter end, and she must be blind too.

BURGUNDY  As love is, my lord, before it loves.

KING HENRY  It is so. And you may, some of you, thank
love for my blindness, who cannot see many a fair
French city for one fair French maid that stands in
my way.

KING OF FRANCE  Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively,
the cities turned into a maid, for they are all
girdled with maiden walls that war hath never
entered.

KING HENRY  Shall Kate be my wife?

KING OF FRANCE  So please you.

KING HENRY  I am content, so the maiden cities you
talk of may wait on her. So the maid that stood in
the way for my wish shall show me the way to my
will.

KING OF FRANCE
We have consented to all terms of reason.

KING HENRY  Is 't so, my lords of England?

WESTMORELAND
The King hath granted every article,
His daughter first, and, in sequel, all,
According to their firm proposed natures.

EXETER
Only he hath not yet subscribed this:
Where your Majesty demands that the King of
France, having any occasion to write for matter of
grant, shall name your Highness in this form and
with this addition, in French: Notre tres cher fils
Henri, roi d' Angleterre, heritier de France; and thus
in Latin: Praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus, rex
Angliae et hoeres Franciae.

KING OF FRANCE
Nor this I have not, brother, so denied
But your request shall make me let it pass.

KING HENRY
I pray you, then, in love and dear alliance,
Let that one article rank with the rest,
And thereupon give me your daughter.

KING OF FRANCE
Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up
Issue to me, that the contending kingdoms
Of France and England, whose very shores look pale
With envy of each other's happiness,
May cease their hatred, and this dear conjunction
Plant neighborhood and Christian-like accord
In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance
His bleeding sword 'twixt England and fair France.

LORDS  Amen.

KING HENRY
Now welcome, Kate, and bear me witness all
That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen.
[He kisses her. Flourish.]

QUEEN OF FRANCE
God, the best maker of all marriages,
Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one.
As man and wife, being two, are one in love,
So be there 'twixt your kingdoms such a spousal
That never may ill office or fell jealousy,
Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,
Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms
To make divorce of their incorporate league,
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
Receive each other. God speak this Amen!

ALL  Amen.

KING HENRY
Prepare we for our marriage; on which day,
My Lord of Burgundy, we'll take your oath,
And all the peers', for surety of our leagues.
Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me,
And may our oaths well kept and prosp'rous be.
[Sennet. They exit.]

[Enter Chorus as Epilogue.]


CHORUS
Thus far with rough and all-unable pen
Our bending author hath pursued the story,
In little room confining mighty men,
Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.
Small time, but in that small most greatly lived
This star of England. Fortune made his sword,
By which the world's best garden he achieved
And of it left his son imperial lord.
Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crowned King
Of France and England, did this king succeed,
Whose state so many had the managing
That they lost France and made his England bleed,
Which oft our stage hath shown. And for their sake,
In your fair minds let this acceptance take.
[He exits.]

Henry VIII
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/henry-viii/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
KING Henry the Eighth
Duke of NORFOLK
Duke of SUFFOLK
Cardinal WOLSEY, Archbishop of Canterbury
SECRETARIES to Wolsey
CROMWELL, servant to Wolsey, later secretary to the Privy Council
Cardinal CAMPEIUS, Papal Legate
GARDINER, secretary to the king, later Bishop of Winchester
PAGE to Gardiner
QUEEN KATHERINE, Henry's first wife, later Princess Dowager
GRIFFITH, attendant on Katherine
PATIENCE, woman to Katherine
Queen's GENTLEMAN USHER
CAPUCHIUS, ambassador from the Emperor Charles
Duke of BUCKINGHAM
Lord ABERGAVENNY, Buckingham's son-in-law
Earl of SURREY, Buckingham's son-in-law
Sir Nicholas VAUX
Knevet, former SURVEYOR to Buckingham
BRANDON
SERGEANT at Arms
FIRST GENTLEMAN
SECOND GENTLEMAN
ANNE Bullen, Katherine's lady-in-waiting, later Henry's second wife and queen
OLD LADY, with Anne Bullen
Lord CHAMBERLAIN
Lord SANDS (also Sir Walter SANDS)
Sir Thomas LOVELL
Sir Henry GUILFORD
Bishop of LINCOLN
CRANMER, later Archbishop of Canterbury
Lord CHANCELLOR
GARTER King of Arms
THIRD GENTLEMAN
Sir Anthony DENNY
Doctor BUTTS
KEEPER
PORTER and his MAN
SCRIBES
CRIER
PROLOGUE
EPILOGUE
Spirits, Princess Elizabeth as an infant, Duchess of Norfolk, Marquess and Marchioness of Dorset, Lords, Nobles, Countesses, Bishops, Judges, Priests, Ladies, Gentlemen, Gentlemen Ushers, Lord Mayor, Four Representatives of the Cinque Ports, Aldermen, Women, Musicians, Choristers, Guards, Tipstaves, Halberds, Vergers, Attendants, Servants, Messenger, Pages, Footboys, Grooms


[Enter Prologue.]


PROLOGUE
I come no more to make you laugh. Things now
That bear a weighty and a serious brow,
Sad, high, and working, full of state and woe,
Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow,
We now present. Those that can pity here
May, if they think it well, let fall a tear;
The subject will deserve it. Such as give
Their money out of hope they may believe
May here find truth too. Those that come to see
Only a show or two, and so agree
The play may pass, if they be still and willing,
I'll undertake may see away their shilling
Richly in two short hours. Only they
That come to hear a merry, bawdy play,
A noise of targets, or to see a fellow
In a long motley coat guarded with yellow,
Will be deceived. For, gentle hearers, know
To rank our chosen truth with such a show
As fool and fight is, besides forfeiting
Our own brains and the opinion that we bring
To make that only true we now intend,
Will leave us never an understanding friend.
Therefore, for goodness' sake, and as you are known
The first and happiest hearers of the town,
Be sad, as we would make you. Think you see
The very persons of our noble story
As they were living. Think you see them great,
And followed with the general throng and sweat
Of thousand friends. Then, in a moment, see
How soon this mightiness meets misery.
And if you can be merry then, I'll say
A man may weep upon his wedding day.
[He exits.]


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the Duke of Norfolk at one door; at the other, the
Duke of Buckingham and the Lord Abergavenny.]


BUCKINGHAM
Good morrow, and well met. How have you done
Since last we saw in France?

NORFOLK  I thank your Grace,
Healthful, and ever since a fresh admirer
Of what I saw there.

BUCKINGHAM  An untimely ague
Stayed me a prisoner in my chamber when
Those suns of glory, those two lights of men,
Met in the vale of Andren.

NORFOLK  'Twixt Guynes and Arde.
I was then present, saw them salute on horseback,
Beheld them when they lighted, how they clung
In their embracement, as they grew together--
Which had they, what four throned ones could have
weighed
Such a compounded one?

BUCKINGHAM  All the whole time
I was my chamber's prisoner.

NORFOLK  Then you lost
The view of earthly glory. Men might say
Till this time pomp was single, but now married
To one above itself. Each following day
Became the next day's master, till the last
Made former wonders its. Today the French,
All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
Shone down the English, and tomorrow they
Made Britain India: every man that stood
Showed like a mine. Their dwarfish pages were
As cherubins, all gilt. The madams too,
Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear
The pride upon them, that their very labor
Was to them as a painting. Now this masque
Was cried incomparable; and th' ensuing night
Made it a fool and beggar. The two kings,
Equal in luster, were now best, now worst,
As presence did present them: him in eye
Still him in praise; and being present both,
'Twas said they saw but one, and no discerner
Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these suns--
For so they phrase 'em--by their heralds challenged
The noble spirits to arms, they did perform
Beyond thought's compass, that former fabulous story,
Being now seen possible enough, got credit
That Bevis was believed.

BUCKINGHAM  O, you go far.

NORFOLK
As I belong to worship, and affect
In honor honesty, the tract of everything
Would by a good discourser lose some life
Which action's self was tongue to. All was royal;
To the disposing of it naught rebelled.
Order gave each thing view. The office did
Distinctly his full function.

BUCKINGHAM  Who did guide,
I mean who set the body and the limbs
Of this great sport together, as you guess?

NORFOLK
One, certes, that promises no element
In such a business.

BUCKINGHAM  I pray you who, my lord?

NORFOLK
All this was ordered by the good discretion
Of the right reverend Cardinal of York.

BUCKINGHAM
The devil speed him! No man's pie is freed
From his ambitious finger. What had he
To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder
That such a keech can with his very bulk
Take up the rays o' th' beneficial sun
And keep it from the Earth.

NORFOLK  Surely, sir,
There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends;
For, being not propped by ancestry, whose grace
Chalks successors their way, nor called upon
For high feats done to th' crown, neither allied
To eminent assistants, but spiderlike,
Out of his self-drawing web, he gives us note
The force of his own merit makes his way--
A gift that heaven gives for him which buys
A place next to the King.

ABERGAVENNY  I cannot tell
What heaven hath given him--let some graver eye
Pierce into that--but I can see his pride
Peep through each part of him. Whence has he that?
If not from hell, the devil is a niggard,
Or has given all before, and he begins
A new hell in himself.

BUCKINGHAM  Why the devil,
Upon this French going-out, took he upon him,
Without the privity o' th' King, t' appoint
Who should attend on him? He makes up the file
Of all the gentry, for the most part such
To whom as great a charge as little honor
He meant to lay upon; and his own letter,
The honorable board of council out,
Must fetch him in he papers.

ABERGAVENNY  I do know
Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
By this so sickened their estates that never
They shall abound as formerly.

BUCKINGHAM  O, many
Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em
For this great journey. What did this vanity
But minister communication of
A most poor issue?

NORFOLK  Grievingly I think
The peace between the French and us not values
The cost that did conclude it.

BUCKINGHAM  Every man,
After the hideous storm that followed, was
A thing inspired and, not consulting, broke
Into a general prophecy: that this tempest,
Dashing the garment of this peace, aboded
The sudden breach on 't.

NORFOLK  Which is budded out,
For France hath flawed the league and hath attached
Our merchants' goods at Bordeaux.

ABERGAVENNY  Is it therefore
Th' ambassador is silenced?

NORFOLK  Marry, is 't.

ABERGAVENNY
A proper title of a peace, and purchased
At a superfluous rate!

BUCKINGHAM  Why, all this business
Our reverend cardinal carried.

NORFOLK  Like it your Grace,
The state takes notice of the private difference
Betwixt you and the Cardinal. I advise you--
And take it from a heart that wishes towards you
Honor and plenteous safety--that you read
The Cardinal's malice and his potency
Together; to consider further that
What his high hatred would effect wants not
A minister in his power. You know his nature,
That he's revengeful, and I know his sword
Hath a sharp edge; it's long, and 't may be said
It reaches far, and where 'twill not extend,
Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel;
You'll find it wholesome. Lo where comes that rock
That I advise your shunning.

[Enter Cardinal Wolsey, the purse borne before him,
certain of the Guard, and two Secretaries with papers.
The Cardinal in his passage fixeth his eye on Buckingham,
and Buckingham on him, both full of disdain.]


WOLSEY, [aside to a Secretary]
The Duke of Buckingham's surveyor, ha?
Where's his examination?

SECRETARY  Here, so please you.
[He hands Wolsey a paper.]

WOLSEY
Is he in person ready?

SECRETARY  Ay, please your Grace.

WOLSEY
Well, we shall then know more, and Buckingham
Shall lessen this big look.
[Cardinal Wolsey and his train exit.]

BUCKINGHAM
This butcher's cur is venomed-mouthed, and I
Have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best
Not wake him in his slumber. A beggar's book
Outworths a noble's blood.

NORFOLK  What, are you chafed?
Ask God for temp'rance. That's th' appliance only
Which your disease requires.

BUCKINGHAM  I read in 's looks
Matter against me, and his eye reviled
Me as his abject object. At this instant
He bores me with some trick. He's gone to th' King.
I'll follow and outstare him.

NORFOLK  Stay, my lord,
And let your reason with your choler question
What 'tis you go about. To climb steep hills
Requires slow pace at first. Anger is like
A full hot horse who, being allowed his way,
Self-mettle tires him. Not a man in England
Can advise me like you; be to yourself
As you would to your friend.

BUCKINGHAM  I'll to the King,
And from a mouth of honor quite cry down
This Ipswich fellow's insolence, or proclaim
There's difference in no persons.

NORFOLK  Be advised.
Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot
That it do singe yourself. We may outrun
By violent swiftness that which we run at
And lose by overrunning. Know you not
The fire that mounts the liquor till 't run o'er
In seeming to augment it wastes it? Be advised.
I say again there is no English soul
More stronger to direct you than yourself,
If with the sap of reason you would quench
Or but allay the fire of passion.

BUCKINGHAM  Sir,
I am thankful to you, and I'll go along
By your prescription. But this top-proud fellow--
Whom from the flow of gall I name not, but
From sincere motions--by intelligence,
And proofs as clear as founts in July when
We see each grain of gravel, I do know
To be corrupt and treasonous.

NORFOLK  Say not "treasonous."

BUCKINGHAM
To th' King I'll say 't, and make my vouch as strong
As shore of rock. Attend. This holy fox,
Or wolf, or both--for he is equal rav'nous
As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief
As able to perform 't, his mind and place
Infecting one another, yea reciprocally--
Only to show his pomp as well in France
As here at home, suggests the King our master
To this last costly treaty, th' interview
That swallowed so much treasure and like a glass
Did break i' th' rinsing.

NORFOLK  Faith, and so it did.

BUCKINGHAM
Pray give me favor, sir. This cunning cardinal
The articles o' th' combination drew
As himself pleased; and they were ratified
As he cried "Thus let be," to as much end
As give a crutch to th' dead. But our Count Cardinal
Has done this, and 'tis well, for worthy Wolsey,
Who cannot err, he did it. Now this follows--
Which, as I take it, is a kind of puppy
To th' old dam treason: Charles the Emperor,
Under pretense to see the Queen his aunt--
For 'twas indeed his color, but he came
To whisper Wolsey--here makes visitation;
His fears were that the interview betwixt
England and France might through their amity
Breed him some prejudice, for from this league
Peeped harms that menaced him; privily
Deals with our cardinal and, as I trow--
Which I do well, for I am sure the Emperor
Paid ere he promised, whereby his suit was granted
Ere it was asked. But when the way was made
And paved with gold, the Emperor thus desired
That he would please to alter the King's course
And break the foresaid peace. Let the King know--
As soon he shall by me--that thus the Cardinal
Does buy and sell his honor as he pleases
And for his own advantage.

NORFOLK  I am sorry
To hear this of him, and could wish he were
Something mistaken in 't.

BUCKINGHAM  No, not a syllable.
I do pronounce him in that very shape
He shall appear in proof.

[Enter Brandon, a Sergeant-at-Arms before him, and two
or three of the Guard.]


BRANDON
Your office, Sergeant: execute it.

SERGEANT, [to Buckingham]  Sir,
My lord the Duke of Buckingham and Earl
Of Hertford, Stafford, and Northampton, I
Arrest thee of high treason, in the name
Of our most sovereign king.

BUCKINGHAM, [to Norfolk]  Lo you, my lord,
The net has fall'n upon me. I shall perish
Under device and practice.

BRANDON  I am sorry
To see you ta'en from liberty, to look on
The business present. 'Tis his Highness' pleasure
You shall to th' Tower.

BUCKINGHAM  It will help me nothing
To plead mine innocence, for that dye is on me
Which makes my whit'st part black. The will of heaven
Be done in this and all things. I obey.
O my Lord Abergavenny, fare you well.

BRANDON
Nay, he must bear you company.--The King
Is pleased you shall to th' Tower, till you know
How he determines further.

ABERGAVENNY  As the Duke said,
The will of heaven be done, and the King's pleasure
By me obeyed.

BRANDON  Here is a warrant from
The King t' attach Lord Mountacute, and the bodies
Of the Duke's confessor, John de la Car,
One Gilbert Peck, his counselor--

BUCKINGHAM  So, so;
These are the limbs o' th' plot. No more, I hope.

BRANDON
A monk o' th' Chartreux.

BUCKINGHAM  O, Michael Hopkins?

BRANDON  He.

BUCKINGHAM
My surveyor is false. The o'ergreat cardinal
Hath showed him gold. My life is spanned already.
I am the shadow of poor Buckingham,
Whose figure even this instant cloud puts on
By dark'ning my clear sun. [To Norfolk.] My lord,
farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Cornets. Enter King Henry, leaning on the Cardinal's
shoulder, with the Nobles, Sir Thomas Lovell, and
Attendants, including a Secretary of the Cardinal.
The Cardinal places himself under the King's feet on
his right side.]


KING, [to Wolsey]
My life itself, and the best heart of it,
Thanks you for this great care. I stood i' th' level
Of a full-charged confederacy, and give thanks
To you that choked it.--Let be called before us
That gentleman of Buckingham's; in person
I'll hear him his confessions justify,
And point by point the treasons of his master
He shall again relate.

[A noise within crying "Room for the Queen!" Enter the
Queen Katherine, ushered by the Duke of Norfolk, and
the Duke of Suffolk. She kneels. The King riseth from
his state.]


QUEEN KATHERINE
Nay, we must longer kneel; I am a suitor.

KING
Arise, and take place by us.
[He takes her up, kisses and placeth her by him.]
Half your suit
Never name to us; you have half our power.
The other moiety ere you ask is given;
Repeat your will, and take it.

QUEEN KATHERINE  Thank your Majesty.
That you would love yourself, and in that love
Not unconsidered leave your honor nor
The dignity of your office, is the point
Of my petition.

KING  Lady mine, proceed.

QUEEN KATHERINE
I am solicited, not by a few,
And those of true condition, that your subjects
Are in great grievance. There have been commissions
Sent down among 'em which hath flawed the heart
Of all their loyalties, wherein, although
My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches
Most bitterly on you as putter-on
Of these exactions, yet the King our master,
Whose honor heaven shield from soil, even he
escapes not
Language unmannerly--yea, such which breaks
The sides of loyalty and almost appears
In loud rebellion.

NORFOLK  Not "almost appears"--
It doth appear. For, upon these taxations,
The clothiers all, not able to maintain
The many to them longing, have put off
The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who,
Unfit for other life, compelled by hunger
And lack of other means, in desperate manner
Daring th' event to th' teeth, are all in uproar,
And danger serves among them.

KING  Taxation?
Wherein? And what taxation? My Lord Cardinal,
You that are blamed for it alike with us,
Know you of this taxation?

WOLSEY  Please you, sir,
I know but of a single part in aught
Pertains to th' state, and front but in that file
Where others tell steps with me.

QUEEN KATHERINE  No, my lord?
You know no more than others? But you frame
Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome
To those which would not know them, and yet must
Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions
Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are
Most pestilent to th' hearing, and to bear 'em
The back is sacrifice to th' load. They say
They are devised by you, or else you suffer
Too hard an exclamation.

KING  Still exaction!
The nature of it? In what kind, let's know,
Is this exaction?

QUEEN KATHERINE  I am much too venturous
In tempting of your patience, but am boldened
Under your promised pardon. The subjects' grief
Comes through commissions which compels from
each
The sixth part of his substance, to be levied
Without delay, and the pretense for this
Is named your wars in France. This makes bold
mouths.
Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
Allegiance in them. Their curses now
Live where their prayers did; and it's come to pass
This tractable obedience is a slave
To each incensed will. I would your Highness
Would give it quick consideration, for
There is no primer baseness.

KING  By my life,
This is against our pleasure.

WOLSEY  And for me,
I have no further gone in this than by
A single voice, and that not passed me but
By learned approbation of the judges. If I am
Traduced by ignorant tongues, which neither know
My faculties nor person, yet will be
The chronicles of my doing, let me say
'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
That virtue must go through. We must not stint
Our necessary actions in the fear
To cope malicious censurers, which ever,
As ravenous fishes, do a vessel follow
That is new trimmed, but benefit no further
Than vainly longing. What we oft do best,
By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is
Not ours or not allowed; what worst, as oft,
Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up
For our best act. If we shall stand still
In fear our motion will be mocked or carped at,
We should take root here where we sit,
Or sit state-statues only.

KING  Things done well,
And with a care, exempt themselves from fear;
Things done without example, in their issue
Are to be feared. Have you a precedent
Of this commission? I believe, not any.
We must not rend our subjects from our laws
And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each?
A trembling contribution! Why, we take
From every tree lop, bark, and part o' th' timber,
And though we leave it with a root, thus hacked,
The air will drink the sap. To every county
Where this is questioned send our letters with
Free pardon to each man that has denied
The force of this commission. Pray look to 't;
I put it to your care.

WOLSEY, [aside to his Secretary]  A word with you.
Let there be letters writ to every shire
Of the King's grace and pardon. The grieved commons
Hardly conceive of me. Let it be noised
That through our intercession this revokement
And pardon comes. I shall anon advise you
Further in the proceeding.	[Secretary exits.]

[Enter Buckingham's Surveyor.]


QUEEN KATHERINE, [to the King]
I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham
Is run in your displeasure.

KING  It grieves many.
The gentleman is learned and a most rare speaker;
To nature none more bound; his training such
That he may furnish and instruct great teachers
And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see,
When these so noble benefits shall prove
Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt,
They turn to vicious forms ten times more ugly
Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,
Who was enrolled 'mongst wonders, and when we
Almost with ravished list'ning could not find
His hour of speech a minute--he, my lady,
Hath into monstrous habits put the graces
That once were his, and is become as black
As if besmeared in hell. Sit by us. You shall hear--
This was his gentleman in trust--of him
Things to strike honor sad.--Bid him recount
The fore-recited practices, whereof
We cannot feel too little, hear too much.

WOLSEY
Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you
Most like a careful subject have collected
Out of the Duke of Buckingham.

KING  Speak freely.

SURVEYOR
First, it was usual with him--every day
It would infect his speech--that if the King
Should without issue die, he'll carry it so
To make the scepter his. These very words
I've heard him utter to his son-in-law,
Lord Abergavenny, to whom by oath he menaced
Revenge upon the Cardinal.

WOLSEY  Please your Highness, note
This dangerous conception in this point:
Not friended by his wish to your high person,
His will is most malignant, and it stretches
Beyond you to your friends.

QUEEN KATHERINE  My learned Lord Cardinal,
Deliver all with charity.

KING, [to Surveyor]  Speak on.
How grounded he his title to the crown
Upon our fail? To this point hast thou heard him
At any time speak aught?

SURVEYOR  He was brought to this
By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Henton.

KING
What was that Henton?

SURVEYOR  Sir, a Chartreux friar,
His confessor, who fed him every minute
With words of sovereignty.

KING  How know'st thou this?

SURVEYOR
Not long before your Highness sped to France,
The Duke being at the Rose, within the parish
Saint Laurence Poultney, did of me demand
What was the speech among the Londoners
Concerning the French journey. I replied
Men fear the French would prove perfidious,
To the King's danger. Presently the Duke
Said 'twas the fear indeed, and that he doubted
'Twould prove the verity of certain words
Spoke by a holy monk "that oft," says he,
"Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit
John de la Car, my chaplain, a choice hour
To hear from him a matter of some moment;
Whom after under the confession's seal
He solemnly had sworn that what he spoke
My chaplain to no creature living but
To me should utter, with demure confidence
This pausingly ensued: 'Neither the King, nor 's heirs--
Tell you the Duke--shall prosper. Bid him strive
To gain the love o' th' commonalty; the Duke
Shall govern England.'"

QUEEN KATHERINE  If I know you well,
You were the Duke's surveyor, and lost your office
On the complaint o' th' tenants. Take good heed
You charge not in your spleen a noble person
And spoil your nobler soul. I say, take heed--
Yes, heartily beseech you.

KING  Let him on.--
Go forward.

SURVEYOR  On my soul, I'll speak but truth.
I told my lord the Duke, by th' devil's illusions
The monk might be deceived, and that 'twas dangerous
For him to ruminate on this so far until
It forged him some design, which, being believed,
It was much like to do. He answered "Tush,
It can do me no damage," adding further
That had the King in his last sickness failed,
The Cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads
Should have gone off.

KING  Ha! What, so rank? Ah ha!
There's mischief in this man! Canst thou say further?

SURVEYOR
I can, my liege.

KING  Proceed.

SURVEYOR  Being at Greenwich,
After your Highness had reproved the Duke
About Sir William Blumer--

KING
I remember of such a time, being my sworn servant,
The Duke retained him his. But on. What hence?

SURVEYOR
"If," quoth he, "I for this had been committed,"
As to the Tower, I thought, "I would have played
The part my father meant to act upon
Th' usurper Richard, who, being at Salisbury,
Made suit to come in 's presence; which if granted,
As he made semblance of his duty, would
Have put his knife into him."

KING  A giant traitor!

WOLSEY
Now, madam, may his Highness live in freedom
And this man out of prison?

QUEEN KATHERINE  God mend all.

KING, [to Surveyor]
There's something more would out of thee. What sayst?

SURVEYOR
After "the Duke his father" with "the knife,"
He stretched him, and with one hand on his dagger,
Another spread on 's breast, mounting his eyes,
He did discharge a horrible oath whose tenor
Was, were he evil used, he would outgo
His father by as much as a performance
Does an irresolute purpose.

KING  There's his period,
To sheathe his knife in us! He is attached.
Call him to present trial. If he may
Find mercy in the law, 'tis his; if none,
Let him not seek 't of us. By day and night,
He's traitor to th' height!
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Lord Chamberlain and Lord Sands.]


CHAMBERLAIN
Is 't possible the spells of France should juggle
Men into such strange mysteries?

SANDS  New customs,
Though they be never so ridiculous--
Nay, let 'em be unmanly--yet are followed.

CHAMBERLAIN
As far as I see, all the good our English
Have got by the late voyage is but merely
A fit or two o' th' face; but they are shrewd ones,
For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly
Their very noses had been counselors
To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.

SANDS
They have all new legs and lame ones; one would
take it,
That never see 'em pace before, the spavin
Or springhalt reigned among 'em.

CHAMBERLAIN  Death! My lord,
Their clothes are after such a pagan cut to 't,
That, sure, they've worn out Christendom.

[Enter Sir Thomas Lovell.]

How now?
What news, Sir Thomas Lovell?

LOVELL  Faith, my lord,
I hear of none but the new proclamation
That's clapped upon the court gate.

CHAMBERLAIN  What is 't for?

LOVELL
The reformation of our traveled gallants
That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.

CHAMBERLAIN
I'm glad 'tis there; now I would pray our monsieurs
To think an English courtier may be wise
And never see the Louvre.

LOVELL  They must either--
For so run the conditions--leave those remnants
Of fool and feather that they got in France,
With all their honorable points of ignorance
Pertaining thereunto, as fights and fireworks,
Abusing better men than they can be
Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean
The faith they have in tennis and tall stockings,
Short blistered breeches, and those types of travel,
And understand again like honest men,
Or pack to their old playfellows. There, I take it,
They may cum privilegio "oui" away
The lag end of their lewdness and be laughed at.

SANDS
'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseases
Are grown so catching.

CHAMBERLAIN  What a loss our ladies
Will have of these trim vanities!

LOVELL  Ay, marry,
There will be woe indeed, lords. The sly whoresons
Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies.
A French song and a fiddle has no fellow.

SANDS
The devil fiddle 'em! I am glad they are going,
For sure there's no converting of 'em. Now
An honest country lord, as I am, beaten
A long time out of play, may bring his plainsong,
And have an hour of hearing, and, by 'r Lady,
Held current music too.

CHAMBERLAIN  Well said, Lord Sands.
Your colt's tooth is not cast yet?

SANDS  No, my lord,
Nor shall not while I have a stump.

CHAMBERLAIN  Sir Thomas,
Whither were you a-going?

LOVELL  To the Cardinal's.
Your Lordship is a guest too.

CHAMBERLAIN  O, 'tis true.
This night he makes a supper, and a great one,
To many lords and ladies. There will be
The beauty of this kingdom, I'll assure you.

LOVELL
That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed,
A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us.
His dews fall everywhere.

CHAMBERLAIN  No doubt he's noble;
He had a black mouth that said other of him.

SANDS
He may, my lord. 'Has wherewithal. In him,
Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine.
Men of his way should be most liberal;
They are set here for examples.

CHAMBERLAIN  True, they are so,
But few now give so great ones. My barge stays.
Your Lordship shall along.--Come, good Sir Thomas,
We shall be late else, which I would not be,
For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guilford
This night to be comptrollers.

SANDS  I am your Lordship's.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Hautboys. A small table under a state for the Cardinal, a
longer table for the guests. Then enter Anne Bullen and
divers other ladies and gentlemen as guests at one door;
at another door enter Sir Henry Guilford.]


GUILFORD
Ladies, a general welcome from his Grace
Salutes you all. This night he dedicates
To fair content and you. None here, he hopes,
In all this noble bevy has brought with her
One care abroad. He would have all as merry
As, first, good company, good wine, good welcome
Can make good people.

[Enter Lord Chamberlain, Lord Sands, and
Sir Thomas Lovell.]

O, my lord, you're tardy!
The very thought of this fair company
Clapped wings to me.

CHAMBERLAIN  You are young, Sir Harry Guilford.

SANDS
Sir Thomas Lovell, had the Cardinal
But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these
Should find a running banquet, ere they rested,
I think would better please 'em. By my life,
They are a sweet society of fair ones.

LOVELL
O, that your Lordship were but now confessor
To one or two of these!

SANDS  I would I were.
They should find easy penance.

LOVELL  Faith, how easy?

SANDS
As easy as a down bed would afford it.

CHAMBERLAIN
Sweet ladies, will it please you sit?--Sir Harry,
Place you that side; I'll take the charge of this.
[The guests are seated.]
His Grace is ent'ring. Nay, you must not freeze;
Two women placed together makes cold weather.
My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking.
Pray sit between these ladies.

SANDS  By my faith,
And thank your Lordship.--By your leave, sweet ladies.
[He sits between Anne Bullen and another lady.]
If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me;
I had it from my father.

ANNE  Was he mad, sir?

SANDS
O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too;
But he would bite none. Just as I do now,
He would kiss you twenty with a breath.
[He kisses Anne.]

CHAMBERLAIN  Well said,
my lord.
So, now you're fairly seated, gentlemen,
The penance lies on you if these fair ladies
Pass away frowning.

SANDS  For my little cure,
Let me alone.

[Hautboys. Enter Cardinal Wolsey, with Attendants and
Servants, and takes his state.]


WOLSEY
You're welcome, my fair guests. That noble lady
Or gentleman that is not freely merry
Is not my friend. This to confirm my welcome,
And to you all good health.	[He drinks to them.]

SANDS  Your Grace is noble.
Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks
And save me so much talking.

WOLSEY  My Lord Sands,
I am beholding to you. Cheer your neighbors.--
Ladies, you are not merry.--Gentlemen,
Whose fault is this?

SANDS  The red wine first must rise
In their fair cheeks, my lord. Then we shall have 'em
Talk us to silence.

ANNE  You are a merry gamester,
My Lord Sands.

SANDS  Yes, if I make my play.
Here's to your Ladyship, and pledge it, madam,
[He drinks to her.]
For 'tis to such a thing--

ANNE  You cannot show me.

SANDS
I told your Grace they would talk anon.
[Drum and Trumpet. Chambers discharged.]

WOLSEY  What's that?

CHAMBERLAIN
Look out there, some of you.	[Servants exit.]

WOLSEY  What warlike voice,
And to what end, is this?--Nay, ladies, fear not.
By all the laws of war you're privileged.

[Enter a Servant.]


CHAMBERLAIN
How now, what is 't?

SERVANT  A noble troop of strangers,
For so they seem. They've left their barge and landed,
And hither make, as great ambassadors
From foreign princes.

WOLSEY  Good Lord Chamberlain,
Go, give 'em welcome--you can speak the French
tongue--
And pray receive 'em nobly, and conduct 'em
Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
[Lord Chamberlain exits, with Attendants.]
[All rise, and tables removed.]
You have now a broken banquet, but we'll mend it.
A good digestion to you all; and once more
I shower a welcome on you. Welcome all!

[Hautboys. Enter King and others as masquers, habited
like shepherds, ushered by the Lord Chamberlain.
They pass directly before the Cardinal and gracefully
salute him.]

A noble company! What are their pleasures?

CHAMBERLAIN
Because they speak no English, thus they prayed
To tell your Grace: that, having heard by fame
Of this so noble and so fair assembly
This night to meet here, they could do no less,
Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,
But leave their flocks and, under your fair conduct,
Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat
An hour of revels with 'em.

WOLSEY  Say, Lord Chamberlain,
They have done my poor house grace, for which I
pay 'em
A thousand thanks and pray 'em take their pleasures.
[The masquers choose Ladies. The
King chooses Anne Bullen.]

KING
The fairest hand I ever touched! O beauty,
Till now I never knew thee.
[Music, Dance.]

WOLSEY
My lord!

CHAMBERLAIN  Your Grace?

WOLSEY  Pray tell 'em thus much
from me:
There should be one amongst 'em by his person
More worthy this place than myself, to whom,
If I but knew him, with my love and duty
I would surrender it.

CHAMBERLAIN  I will, my lord.
[Whisper with the masquers.]

WOLSEY
What say they?

CHAMBERLAIN  Such a one they all confess
There is indeed, which they would have your Grace
Find out, and he will take it.

WOLSEY  Let me see, then.
[He leaves his state.]
By all your good leaves, gentlemen.
[He bows before the King.]
Here I'll make
My royal choice.

KING, [unmasking]  You have found him, cardinal.
You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord.
You are a churchman, or I'll tell you, cardinal,
I should judge now unhappily.

WOLSEY  I am glad
Your Grace is grown so pleasant.

KING  My Lord Chamberlain,
Prithee come hither. What fair lady's that?

CHAMBERLAIN
An 't please your Grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's daughter,
The Viscount Rochford, one of her Highness' women.

KING
By heaven, she is a dainty one.--Sweetheart,
I were unmannerly to take you out
And not to kiss you. [He kisses Anne.] A health,
gentlemen!
Let it go round.	[He drinks a toast.]

WOLSEY
Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready
I' th' privy chamber?

LOVELL  Yes, my lord.

WOLSEY  Your Grace,
I fear, with dancing is a little heated.

KING
I fear, too much.

WOLSEY  There's fresher air, my lord,
In the next chamber.

KING
Lead in your ladies ev'ry one.--Sweet partner,
I must not yet forsake you.--Let's be merry,
Good my Lord Cardinal. I have half a dozen healths
To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure
To lead 'em once again, and then let's dream
Who's best in favor. Let the music knock it.
[They exit, with Trumpets.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter two Gentlemen at several doors.]


FIRST GENTLEMAN
Whither away so fast?

SECOND GENTLEMAN  O, God save you.
E'en to the Hall to hear what shall become
Of the great Duke of Buckingham.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  I'll save you
That labor, sir. All's now done but the ceremony
Of bringing back the prisoner.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Were you there?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
Yes, indeed was I.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Pray speak what has happened.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
You may guess quickly what.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Is he found guilty?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
Yes, truly, is he, and condemned upon 't.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
I am sorry for 't.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  So are a number more.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  But pray, how passed it?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
I'll tell you in a little. The great duke
Came to the bar, where to his accusations
He pleaded still not guilty and alleged
Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.
The King's attorney on the contrary
Urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions
Of divers witnesses, which the Duke desired
To him brought viva voce to his face;
At which appeared against him his surveyor,
Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor, and John Car,
Confessor to him, with that devil monk,
Hopkins, that made this mischief.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  That was he
That fed him with his prophecies?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  The same.
All these accused him strongly, which he fain
Would have flung from him, but indeed he could not.
And so his peers upon this evidence
Have found him guilty of high treason. Much
He spoke, and learnedly, for life, but all
Was either pitied in him or forgotten.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
After all this, how did he bear himself?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
When he was brought again to th' bar to hear
His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirred
With such an agony he sweat extremely
And something spoke in choler, ill and hasty.
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly
In all the rest showed a most noble patience.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
I do not think he fears death.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Sure he does not;
He never was so womanish. The cause
He may a little grieve at.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Certainly
The Cardinal is the end of this.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  'Tis likely,
By all conjectures; first, Kildare's attainder,
Then Deputy of Ireland, who, removed,
Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,
Lest he should help his father.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  That trick of state
Was a deep envious one.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  At his return
No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,
And generally: whoever the King favors,
The Card'nal instantly will find employment,
And far enough from court too.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  All the commons
Hate him perniciously and, o' my conscience,
Wish him ten fathom deep. This duke as much
They love and dote on, call him bounteous
Buckingham,
The mirror of all courtesy.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Stay there, sir,
And see the noble ruined man you speak of.

[Enter Buckingham from his arraignment, Tipstaves before
him, the ax with the edge towards him, Halberds on each
side, accompanied with Sir Thomas Lovell, Sir Nicholas
Vaux, Sir Walter Sands, and Common People, etc.]


SECOND GENTLEMAN
Let's stand close and behold him.

BUCKINGHAM  All good people,
You that thus far have come to pity me,
Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
I have this day received a traitor's judgment,
And by that name must die. Yet heaven bear witness,
And if I have a conscience, let it sink me
Even as the ax falls, if I be not faithful!
The law I bear no malice for my death;
'T has done, upon the premises, but justice.
But those that sought it I could wish more Christian.
Be what they will, I heartily forgive 'em.
Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief,
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men,
For then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.
For further life in this world I ne'er hope,
Nor will I sue, although the King have mercies
More than I dare make faults. You few that loved me
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave
Is only bitter to him, only dying,
Go with me like good angels to my end,
And as the long divorce of steel falls on me,
Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,
And lift my soul to heaven.--Lead on, a' God's name.

LOVELL
I do beseech your Grace, for charity,
If ever any malice in your heart
Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.

BUCKINGHAM
Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you
As I would be forgiven. I forgive all.
There cannot be those numberless offenses
'Gainst me that I cannot take peace with. No black
envy
Shall make my grave. Commend me to his Grace.
And if he speak of Buckingham, pray tell him
You met him half in heaven. My vows and prayers
Yet are the King's and, till my soul forsake,
Shall cry for blessings on him. May he live
Longer than I have time to tell his years.
Ever beloved and loving may his rule be;
And when old Time shall lead him to his end,
Goodness and he fill up one monument!

LOVELL
To th' waterside I must conduct your Grace,
Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,
Who undertakes you to your end.

VAUX, [calling as to Officers offstage]  Prepare there!
The Duke is coming. See the barge be ready,
And fit it with such furniture as suits
The greatness of his person.

BUCKINGHAM  Nay, Sir Nicholas,
Let it alone. My state now will but mock me.
When I came hither, I was Lord High Constable
And Duke of Buckingham; now, poor Edward Bohun.
Yet I am richer than my base accusers,
That never knew what truth meant. I now seal it,
And with that blood will make 'em one day groan for 't.
My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,
Who first raised head against usurping Richard,
Flying for succor to his servant Banister,
Being distressed, was by that wretch betrayed,
And, without trial, fell. God's peace be with him.
Henry the Seventh, succeeding, truly pitying
My father's loss, like a most royal prince
Restored me to my honors and out of ruins
Made my name once more noble. Now his son,
Henry the Eighth, life, honor, name, and all
That made me happy at one stroke has taken
Forever from the world. I had my trial,
And must needs say a noble one, which makes me
A little happier than my wretched father.
Yet thus far we are one in fortunes: both
Fell by our servants, by those men we loved most--
A most unnatural and faithless service.
Heaven has an end in all; yet, you that hear me,
This from a dying man receive as certain:
Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels
Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends
And give your hearts to, when they once perceive
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
Like water from you, never found again
But where they mean to sink you. All good people,
Pray for me. I must now forsake you. The last hour
Of my long weary life is come upon me.
Farewell. And when you would say something that
is sad,
Speak how I fell. I have done; and God forgive me.
[Duke and train exit.]

FIRST GENTLEMAN
O, this is full of pity, sir! It calls,
I fear, too many curses on their heads
That were the authors.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  If the Duke be guiltless,
'Tis full of woe. Yet I can give you inkling
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
Greater than this.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Good angels keep it from us!
What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
This secret is so weighty 'twill require
A strong faith to conceal it.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Let me have it.
I do not talk much.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  I am confident;
You shall, sir. Did you not of late days hear
A buzzing of a separation
Between the King and Katherine?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Yes, but it held not;
For when the King once heard it, out of anger
He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight
To stop the rumor and allay those tongues
That durst disperse it.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  But that slander, sir,
Is found a truth now, for it grows again
Fresher than e'er it was, and held for certain
The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal,
Or some about him near, have, out of malice
To the good queen, possessed him with a scruple
That will undo her. To confirm this too,
Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately,
As all think, for this business.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  'Tis the Cardinal;
And merely to revenge him on the Emperor
For not bestowing on him at his asking
The archbishopric of Toledo this is purposed.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
I think you have hit the mark. But is 't not cruel
That she should feel the smart of this? The Cardinal
Will have his will, and she must fall.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  'Tis woeful.
We are too open here to argue this.
Let's think in private more.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Lord Chamberlain, reading this letter.]


CHAMBERLAIN  My lord, the horses your Lordship sent
for, with all the care I had I saw well chosen, ridden,
and furnished. They were young and handsome and
of the best breed in the north. When they were ready
to set out for London, a man of my Lord Cardinal's,
by commission and main power, took 'em from me
with this reason: his master would be served before
a subject, if not before the King, which stopped our
mouths, sir.
I fear he will indeed; well, let him have them.
He will have all, I think.

[Enter to the Lord Chamberlain, the Dukes
of Norfolk and Suffolk.]


NORFOLK  Well met, my Lord Chamberlain.

CHAMBERLAIN  Good day to both your Graces.

SUFFOLK
How is the King employed?

CHAMBERLAIN  I left him private,
Full of sad thoughts and troubles.

NORFOLK  What's the cause?

CHAMBERLAIN
It seems the marriage with his brother's wife
Has crept too near his conscience.

SUFFOLK  No, his conscience
Has crept too near another lady.

NORFOLK  'Tis so;
This is the Cardinal's doing. The king-cardinal,
That blind priest, like the eldest son of Fortune,
Turns what he list. The King will know him one day.

SUFFOLK
Pray God he do! He'll never know himself else.

NORFOLK
How holily he works in all his business,
And with what zeal! For, now he has cracked the
league
Between us and the Emperor, the Queen's
great-nephew,
He dives into the King's soul and there scatters
Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,
Fears and despairs--and all these for his marriage.
And out of all these to restore the King,
He counsels a divorce, a loss of her
That like a jewel has hung twenty years
About his neck, yet never lost her luster;
Of her that loves him with that excellence
That angels love good men with; even of her
That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,
Will bless the King. And is not this course pious?

CHAMBERLAIN
Heaven keep me from such counsel! 'Tis most true:
These news are everywhere, every tongue speaks 'em,
And every true heart weeps for 't. All that dare
Look into these affairs see this main end,
The French king's sister. Heaven will one day open
The King's eyes, that so long have slept upon
This bold bad man.

SUFFOLK  And free us from his slavery.

NORFOLK  We had need pray,
And heartily, for our deliverance,
Or this imperious man will work us all
From princes into pages. All men's honors
Lie like one lump before him, to be fashioned
Into what pitch he please.

SUFFOLK  For me, my lords,
I love him not nor fear him; there's my creed.
As I am made without him, so I'll stand,
If the King please. His curses and his blessings
Touch me alike: they're breath I not believe in.
I knew him and I know him; so I leave him
To him that made him proud, the Pope.

NORFOLK  Let's in,
And with some other business put the King
From these sad thoughts that work too much upon
him.--
My lord, you'll bear us company?

CHAMBERLAIN  Excuse me;
The King has sent me otherwhere. Besides,
You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him.
Health to your Lordships.

NORFOLK  Thanks, my good Lord
Chamberlain.
[Lord Chamberlain exits; and the King draws
the curtain and sits reading pensively.]

SUFFOLK, [to Norfolk]
How sad he looks! Sure he is much afflicted.

KING
Who's there? Ha?

NORFOLK, [to Suffolk]  Pray God he be not angry.

KING
Who's there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves
Into my private meditations? Who am I, ha?

NORFOLK
A gracious king that pardons all offenses
Malice ne'er meant. Our breach of duty this way
Is business of estate, in which we come
To know your royal pleasure.

KING  You are too bold.
Go to; I'll make you know your times of business.
Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?

[Enter Wolsey and Campeius, with a commission.]

Who's there? My good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,
The quiet of my wounded conscience,
Thou art a cure fit for a king. [To Campeius.] You're
welcome,
Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom.
Use us and it.--My good lord, have great care
I be not found a talker.

WOLSEY  Sir, you cannot.
I would your Grace would give us but an hour
Of private conference.

KING, [to Norfolk and Suffolk]  We are busy. Go.

NORFOLK, [aside to Suffolk]
This priest has no pride in him?

SUFFOLK, [aside to Norfolk]  Not to speak of.
I would not be so sick, though for his place.
But this cannot continue.

NORFOLK, [aside to Suffolk]  If it do,
I'll venture one have-at-him.

SUFFOLK, [aside to Norfolk]  I another.
[Norfolk and Suffolk exit.]

WOLSEY
Your Grace has given a precedent of wisdom
Above all princes in committing freely
Your scruple to the voice of Christendom.
Who can be angry now? What envy reach you?
The Spaniard, tied by blood and favor to her,
Must now confess, if they have any goodness,
The trial just and noble; all the clerks--
I mean the learned ones in Christian kingdoms--
Have their free voices; Rome, the nurse of judgment,
Invited by your noble self, hath sent
One general tongue unto us, this good man,
This just and learned priest, Cardinal Campeius,
Whom once more I present unto your Highness.

KING
And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
And thank the holy conclave for their loves.
They have sent me such a man I would have wished
for.	[He embraces Campeius.]

CAMPEIUS, [handing the King a paper]
Your Grace must needs deserve all strangers' loves,
You are so noble. To your Highness' hand
I tender my commission--by whose virtue,
The court of Rome commanding, you, my Lord
Cardinal of York, are joined with me their servant
In the unpartial judging of this business.

KING
Two equal men. The Queen shall be acquainted
Forthwith for what you come. Where's Gardiner?

WOLSEY
I know your Majesty has always loved her
So dear in heart not to deny her that
A woman of less place might ask by law:
Scholars allowed freely to argue for her.

KING
Ay, and the best she shall have, and my favor
To him that does best. God forbid else. Cardinal,
Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new secretary.
I find him a fit fellow.	[Wolsey goes to the door.]

[Enter Gardiner to Wolsey.]


WOLSEY, [aside to Gardiner]
Give me your hand. Much joy and favor to you.
You are the King's now.

GARDINER, [aside to Wolsey]  But to be commanded
Forever by your Grace, whose hand has raised me.

KING  Come hither, Gardiner.
[The King and Gardiner walk and whisper.]

CAMPEIUS
My lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace
In this man's place before him?

WOLSEY  Yes, he was.

CAMPEIUS
Was he not held a learned man?

WOLSEY  Yes, surely.

CAMPEIUS
Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread, then,
Even of yourself, Lord Cardinal.

WOLSEY  How? Of me?

CAMPEIUS
They will not stick to say you envied him
And, fearing he would rise--he was so virtuous--
Kept him a foreign man still, which so grieved him
That he ran mad and died.

WOLSEY  Heav'n's peace be with him!
That's Christian care enough. For living murmurers,
There's places of rebuke. He was a fool,
For he would needs be virtuous. That good fellow
If I command him follows my appointment.
I will have none so near else. Learn this, brother:
We live not to be griped by meaner persons.

KING, [to Gardiner]
Deliver this with modesty to th' Queen.
[Gardiner exits.]
The most convenient place that I can think of
For such receipt of learning is Blackfriars.
There you shall meet about this weighty business.
My Wolsey, see it furnished. O, my lord,
Would it not grieve an able man to leave
So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience!
O, 'tis a tender place, and I must leave her.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Anne Bullen and an old Lady.]


ANNE
Not for that neither. Here's the pang that pinches:
His Highness having lived so long with her, and she
So good a lady that no tongue could ever
Pronounce dishonor of her--by my life,
She never knew harm-doing!--O, now, after
So many courses of the sun enthroned,
Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which
To leave a thousandfold more bitter than
'Tis sweet at first t' acquire--after this process,
To give her the avaunt! It is a pity
Would move a monster.

OLD LADY  Hearts of most hard temper
Melt and lament for her.

ANNE  O, God's will! Much better
She ne'er had known pomp; though 't be temporal,
Yet if that quarrel, Fortune, do divorce
It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance panging
As soul and body's severing.

OLD LADY  Alas, poor lady,
She's a stranger now again!

ANNE  So much the more
Must pity drop upon her. Verily,
I swear, 'tis better to be lowly born
And range with humble livers in content
Than to be perked up in a glist'ring grief
And wear a golden sorrow.

OLD LADY  Our content
Is our best having.

ANNE  By my troth and maidenhead,
I would not be a queen.

OLD LADY  Beshrew me, I would,
And venture maidenhead for 't; and so would you,
For all this spice of your hypocrisy.
You, that have so fair parts of woman on you,
Have too a woman's heart, which ever yet
Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty;
Which, to say sooth, are blessings; and which gifts,
Saving your mincing, the capacity
Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive
If you might please to stretch it.

ANNE  Nay, good troth.

OLD LADY
Yes, troth, and troth. You would not be a queen?

ANNE
No, not for all the riches under heaven.

OLD LADY
'Tis strange. A threepence bowed would hire me,
Old as I am, to queen it. But I pray you,
What think you of a duchess? Have you limbs
To bear that load of title?

ANNE  No, in truth.

OLD LADY
Then you are weakly made. Pluck off a little.
I would not be a young count in your way
For more than blushing comes to. If your back
Cannot vouchsafe this burden, 'tis too weak
Ever to get a boy.

ANNE  How you do talk!
I swear again, I would not be a queen
For all the world.

OLD LADY  In faith, for little England
You'd venture an emballing. I myself
Would for Carnarvanshire, although there longed
No more to th' crown but that. Lo, who comes here?

[Enter Lord Chamberlain.]


CHAMBERLAIN
Good morrow, ladies. What were 't worth to know
The secret of your conference?

ANNE  My good lord,
Not your demand; it values not your asking.
Our mistress' sorrows we were pitying.

CHAMBERLAIN
It was a gentle business, and becoming
The action of good women. There is hope
All will be well.

ANNE  Now, I pray God, amen!

CHAMBERLAIN
You bear a gentle mind, and heav'nly blessings
Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady,
Perceive I speak sincerely, and high note's
Ta'en of your many virtues, the King's Majesty
Commends his good opinion of you to you, and
Does purpose honor to you no less flowing
Than Marchioness of Pembroke, to which title
A thousand pound a year annual support
Out of his grace he adds.

ANNE  I do not know
What kind of my obedience I should tender.
More than my all is nothing, nor my prayers
Are not words duly hallowed, nor my wishes
More worth than empty vanities. Yet prayers and
wishes
Are all I can return. 'Beseech your Lordship,
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience,
As from a blushing handmaid, to his Highness,
Whose health and royalty I pray for.

CHAMBERLAIN  Lady,
I shall not fail t' approve the fair conceit
The King hath of you. [(Aside.)] I have perused her
well.
Beauty and honor in her are so mingled
That they have caught the King. And who knows yet
But from this lady may proceed a gem
To lighten all this isle?--I'll to the King
And say I spoke with you.

ANNE  My honored lord.
[Lord Chamberlain exits.]

OLD LADY  Why, this it is! See, see!
I have been begging sixteen years in court,
Am yet a courtier beggarly, nor could
Come pat betwixt too early and too late
For any suit of pounds; and you--O, fate!--
A very fresh fish here--fie, fie, fie upon
This compelled fortune!--have your mouth filled up
Before you open it.

ANNE  This is strange to me.

OLD LADY
How tastes it? Is it bitter? Forty pence, no.
There was a lady once--'tis an old story--
That would not be a queen, that would she not,
For all the mud in Egypt. Have you heard it?

ANNE
Come, you are pleasant.

OLD LADY  With your theme, I could
O'ermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pembroke?
A thousand pounds a year for pure respect?
No other obligation? By my life,
That promises more thousands; honor's train
Is longer than his foreskirt. By this time
I know your back will bear a duchess. Say,
Are you not stronger than you were?

ANNE  Good lady,
Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,
And leave me out on 't. Would I had no being
If this salute my blood a jot. It faints me
To think what follows.
The Queen is comfortless and we forgetful
In our long absence. Pray do not deliver
What here you've heard to her.

OLD LADY  What do you think me?
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Trumpets, sennet, and cornets. Enter two Vergers, with
short silver wands; next them, two Scribes, in the habit of
doctors; after them, the Bishop of Canterbury alone; after
him, the Bishops of Lincoln, Ely, Rochester, and Saint
Asaph; next them, with some small distance, follows a
Gentleman bearing the purse with the great seal, and a
cardinal's hat. Then two Priests, bearing each a silver
cross; then a Gentleman Usher bare-headed, accompanied
with a Sergeant-at-Arms, bearing a silver mace; then two
Gentlemen, bearing two great silver pillars. After them,
side by side, the two Cardinals, and two Noblemen with
the sword and mace. The King takes place under the cloth
of state. The two Cardinals sit under him as judges. The
Queen takes place some distance from the King. The
Bishops place themselves on each side the court, in
manner of a consistory; below them the Scribes. The
Lords sit next the Bishops. The rest of the Attendants
including a Crier and the Queen's Gentleman Usher
stand in convenient order about the stage.]


WOLSEY
Whilst our commission from Rome is read,
Let silence be commanded.

KING  What's the need?
It hath already publicly been read,
And on all sides th' authority allowed.
You may then spare that time.

WOLSEY  Be 't so. Proceed.

SCRIBE  Say "Henry King of England, come into the
court."

CRIER  Henry King of England, come into the court.

KING  Here.

SCRIBE  Say "Katherine Queen of England, come into
the court."

CRIER  Katherine Queen of England, come into the
court.
[The Queen makes no answer, rises out of her
chair, goes about the court, comes to the King,
and kneels at his feet; then speaks.]

QUEEN KATHERINE
Sir, I desire you do me right and justice,
And to bestow your pity on me; for
I am a most poor woman and a stranger,
Born out of your dominions, having here
No judge indifferent nor no more assurance
Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir,
In what have I offended you? What cause
Hath my behavior given to your displeasure
That thus you should proceed to put me off
And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness
I have been to you a true and humble wife,
At all times to your will conformable,
Ever in fear to kindle your dislike,
Yea, subject to your countenance, glad or sorry
As I saw it inclined. When was the hour
I ever contradicted your desire,
Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends
Have I not strove to love, although I knew
He were mine enemy? What friend of mine
That had to him derived your anger did I
Continue in my liking? Nay, gave notice
He was from thence discharged? Sir, call to mind
That I have been your wife in this obedience
Upward of twenty years, and have been blessed
With many children by you. If, in the course
And process of this time, you can report,
And prove it too, against mine honor aught,
My bond to wedlock or my love and duty
Against your sacred person, in God's name
Turn me away and let the foul'st contempt
Shut door upon me, and so give me up
To the sharp'st kind of justice. Please you, sir,
The King your father was reputed for
A prince most prudent, of an excellent
And unmatched wit and judgment. Ferdinand,
My father, King of Spain, was reckoned one
The wisest prince that there had reigned by many
A year before. It is not to be questioned
That they had gathered a wise council to them
Of every realm, that did debate this business,
Who deemed our marriage lawful. Wherefore I humbly
Beseech you, sir, to spare me till I may
Be by my friends in Spain advised, whose counsel
I will implore. If not, i' th' name of God,
Your pleasure be fulfilled.

WOLSEY  You have here, lady,
And of your choice, these reverend fathers, men
Of singular integrity and learning,
Yea, the elect o' th' land, who are assembled
To plead your cause. It shall be therefore bootless
That longer you desire the court, as well
For your own quiet as to rectify
What is unsettled in the King.

CAMPEIUS  His Grace
Hath spoken well and justly. Therefore, madam,
It's fit this royal session do proceed
And that without delay their arguments
Be now produced and heard.

QUEEN KATHERINE  Lord Cardinal,
To you I speak.

WOLSEY  Your pleasure, madam.

QUEEN KATHERINE  Sir,
I am about to weep; but thinking that
We are a queen, or long have dreamed so, certain
The daughter of a king, my drops of tears
I'll turn to sparks of fire.

WOLSEY  Be patient yet.

QUEEN KATHERINE
I will, when you are humble; nay, before,
Or God will punish me. I do believe,
Induced by potent circumstances, that
You are mine enemy, and make my challenge
You shall not be my judge; for it is you
Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me--
Which God's dew quench! Therefore I say again,
I utterly abhor, yea, from my soul
Refuse you for my judge, whom, yet once more,
I hold my most malicious foe and think not
At all a friend to truth.

WOLSEY  I do profess
You speak not like yourself, who ever yet
Have stood to charity and displayed th' effects
Of disposition gentle and of wisdom
O'ertopping woman's power. Madam, you do me
wrong.
I have no spleen against you, nor injustice
For you or any. How far I have proceeded,
Or how far further shall, is warranted
By a commission from the Consistory,
Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge me
That I "have blown this coal." I do deny it.
The King is present. If it be known to him
That I gainsay my deed, how may he wound,
And worthily, my falsehood, yea, as much
As you have done my truth. If he know
That I am free of your report, he knows
I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him
It lies to cure me, and the cure is to
Remove these thoughts from you, the which before
His Highness shall speak in, I do beseech
You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking
And to say so no more.

QUEEN KATHERINE  My lord, my lord,
I am a simple woman, much too weak
T' oppose your cunning. You're meek and
humble-mouthed;
You sign your place and calling, in full seeming,
With meekness and humility, but your heart
Is crammed with arrogancy, spleen, and pride.
You have by fortune and his Highness' favors
Gone slightly o'er low steps, and now are mounted
Where powers are your retainers, and your words,
Domestics to you, serve your will as 't please
Yourself pronounce their office. I must tell you,
You tender more your person's honor than
Your high profession spiritual, that again
I do refuse you for my judge, and here,
Before you all, appeal unto the Pope
To bring my whole cause 'fore his Holiness,
And to be judged by him.
[She curtsies to the King, and offers to depart.]

CAMPEIUS  The Queen is obstinate,
Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and
Disdainful to be tried by 't. 'Tis not well.
She's going away.

KING  Call her again.

CRIER  Katherine, Queen of England, come into the
court.

GENTLEMAN USHER  Madam, you are called back.

QUEEN KATHERINE
What need you note it? Pray you, keep your way.
When you are called, return. Now, the Lord help!
They vex me past my patience. Pray you, pass on.
I will not tarry; no, nor ever more
Upon this business my appearance make
In any of their courts.
[Queen and her Attendants exit.]

KING  Go thy ways, Kate.
That man i' th' world who shall report he has
A better wife, let him in naught be trusted,
For speaking false in that. Thou art, alone--
If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
Thy meekness saintlike, wifelike government,
Obeying in commanding, and thy parts
Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out--
The queen of earthly queens. She's noble born,
And like her true nobility she has
Carried herself towards me.

WOLSEY  Most gracious sir,
In humblest manner I require your Highness
That it shall please you to declare in hearing
Of all these ears--for where I am robbed and bound,
There must I be unloosed, although not there
At once and fully satisfied--whether ever I
Did broach this business to your Highness, or
Laid any scruple in your way which might
Induce you to the question on 't, or ever
Have to you, but with thanks to God for such
A royal lady, spake one the least word that might
Be to the prejudice of her present state,
Or touch of her good person?

KING  My Lord Cardinal,
I do excuse you; yea, upon mine honor,
I free you from 't. You are not to be taught
That you have many enemies that know not
Why they are so but, like to village curs,
Bark when their fellows do. By some of these
The Queen is put in anger. You're excused.
But will you be more justified? You ever
Have wished the sleeping of this business, never
desired
It to be stirred, but oft have hindered, oft,
The passages made toward it. On my honor
I speak my good Lord Cardinal to this point
And thus far clear him. Now, what moved me to 't,
I will be bold with time and your attention.
Then mark th' inducement. Thus it came; give heed
to 't:
My conscience first received a tenderness,
Scruple, and prick on certain speeches uttered
By th' Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador,
Who had been hither sent on the debating
A marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans and
Our daughter Mary. I' th' progress of this business,
Ere a determinate resolution, he,
I mean the Bishop, did require a respite
Wherein he might the King his lord advertise
Whether our daughter were legitimate,
Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,
Sometime our brother's wife. This respite shook
The bosom of my conscience, entered me,
Yea, with a spitting power, and made to tremble
The region of my breast; which forced such way
That many mazed considerings did throng
And pressed in with this caution. First, methought
I stood not in the smile of heaven, who had
Commanded nature that my lady's womb,
If it conceived a male child by me, should
Do no more offices of life to 't than
The grave does to th' dead, for her male issue
Or died where they were made, or shortly after
This world had aired them. Hence I took a thought
This was a judgment on me, that my kingdom,
Well worthy the best heir o' th' world, should not
Be gladded in 't by me. Then follows that
I weighed the danger which my realms stood in
By this my issue's fail, and that gave to me
Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in
The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer
Toward this remedy whereupon we are
Now present here together. That's to say,
I meant to rectify my conscience, which
I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,
By all the reverend fathers of the land
And doctors learned. First, I began in private
With you, my Lord of Lincoln. You remember
How under my oppression I did reek
When I first moved you.

LINCOLN  Very well, my liege.

KING
I have spoke long. Be pleased yourself to say
How far you satisfied me.

LINCOLN  So please your Highness,
The question did at first so stagger me,
Bearing a state of mighty moment in 't
And consequence of dread, that I committed
The daring'st counsel which I had to doubt,
And did entreat your Highness to this course
Which you are running here.

KING  I then moved you,
My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave
To make this present summons. Unsolicited
I left no reverend person in this court,
But by particular consent proceeded
Under your hands and seals. Therefore go on,
For no dislike i' th' world against the person
Of the good queen, but the sharp thorny points
Of my alleged reasons drives this forward.
Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life
And kingly dignity, we are contented
To wear our mortal state to come with her,
Katherine our queen, before the primest creature
That's paragoned o' th' world.

CAMPEIUS  So please your Highness,
The Queen being absent, 'tis a needful fitness
That we adjourn this court till further day.
Meanwhile must be an earnest motion
Made to the Queen to call back her appeal
She intends unto his Holiness.

KING, [aside]  I may perceive
These cardinals trifle with me. I abhor
This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.
My learned and well-beloved servant Cranmer,
Prithee return. With thy approach, I know,
My comfort comes along.--Break up the court.
I say, set on.
[They exit, in manner as they entered.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Queen and her Women, as at work.]


QUEEN KATHERINE
Take thy lute, wench. My soul grows sad with troubles.
Sing, and disperse 'em if thou canst. Leave working.

WOMAN [sings song.]

	Orpheus with his lute made trees
	And the mountaintops that freeze
	   Bow themselves when he did sing.
	To his music plants and flowers
	Ever sprung, as sun and showers
	   There had made a lasting spring.

	Everything that heard him play,
	Even the billows of the sea,
	   Hung their heads and then lay by.
	In sweet music is such art,
	Killing care and grief of heart
	   Fall asleep or, hearing, die.

[Enter a Gentleman.]


QUEEN KATHERINE  How now?

GENTLEMAN
An 't please your Grace, the two great cardinals
Wait in the presence.

QUEEN KATHERINE  Would they speak with me?

GENTLEMAN
They willed me say so, madam.

QUEEN KATHERINE  Pray their Graces
To come near.	[Gentleman exits.]
What can be their business
With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favor?
I do not like their coming, now I think on 't.
They should be good men, their affairs as righteous.
But all hoods make not monks.

[Enter the two Cardinals, Wolsey and Campeius.]


WOLSEY  Peace to your Highness.

QUEEN KATHERINE
Your Graces find me here part of a housewife;
I would be all, against the worst may happen.
What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?

WOLSEY
May it please you, noble madam, to withdraw
Into your private chamber, we shall give you
The full cause of our coming.

QUEEN KATHERINE  Speak it here.
There's nothing I have done yet, o' my conscience,
Deserves a corner. Would all other women
Could speak this with as free a soul as I do.
My lords, I care not, so much I am happy
Above a number, if my actions
Were tried by ev'ry tongue, ev'ry eye saw 'em,
Envy and base opinion set against 'em,
I know my life so even. If your business
Seek me out, and that way I am wife in,
Out with it boldly. Truth loves open dealing.

WOLSEY  Tanta est erga te mentis integritas, regina
serenissima--

QUEEN KATHERINE  O, good my lord, no Latin!
I am not such a truant since my coming
As not to know the language I have lived in.
A strange tongue makes my cause more strange,
suspicious.
Pray speak in English. Here are some will thank you,
If you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake.
Believe me, she has had much wrong. Lord Cardinal,
The willing'st sin I ever yet committed
May be absolved in English.

WOLSEY  Noble lady,
I am sorry my integrity should breed--
And service to his Majesty and you--
So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant.
We come not by the way of accusation,
To taint that honor every good tongue blesses,
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow--
You have too much, good lady--but to know
How you stand minded in the weighty difference
Between the King and you, and to deliver,
Like free and honest men, our just opinions
And comforts to your cause.

CAMPEIUS  Most honored madam,
My Lord of York, out of his noble nature,
Zeal, and obedience he still bore your Grace,
Forgetting, like a good man, your late censure
Both of his truth and him--which was too far--
Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace,
His service and his counsel.

QUEEN KATHERINE, [aside]  To betray me.--
My lords, I thank you both for your good wills.
You speak like honest men; pray God you prove so.
But how to make you suddenly an answer
In such a point of weight, so near mine honor--
More near my life, I fear--with my weak wit,
And to such men of gravity and learning,
In truth I know not. I was set at work
Among my maids, full little, God knows, looking
Either for such men or such business.
For her sake that I have been--for I feel
The last fit of my greatness--good your Graces,
Let me have time and counsel for my cause.
Alas, I am a woman friendless, hopeless.

WOLSEY
Madam, you wrong the King's love with these fears;
Your hopes and friends are infinite.

QUEEN KATHERINE  In England
But little for my profit. Can you think, lords,
That any Englishman dare give me counsel,
Or be a known friend, 'gainst his Highness' pleasure,
Though he be grown so desperate to be honest,
And live a subject? Nay, forsooth. My friends,
They that must weigh out my afflictions,
They that my trust must grow to, live not here.
They are, as all my other comforts, far hence
In mine own country, lords.

CAMPEIUS  I would your Grace
Would leave your griefs and take my counsel.

QUEEN KATHERINE  How, sir?

CAMPEIUS
Put your main cause into the King's protection.
He's loving and most gracious. 'Twill be much
Both for your honor better and your cause,
For if the trial of the law o'ertake you,
You'll part away disgraced.

WOLSEY  He tells you rightly.

QUEEN KATHERINE
You tell me what you wish for both: my ruin.
Is this your Christian counsel? Out upon you!
Heaven is above all yet; there sits a judge
That no king can corrupt.

CAMPEIUS  Your rage mistakes us.

QUEEN KATHERINE
The more shame for you! Holy men I thought you,
Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues;
But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear you.
Mend 'em, for shame, my lords. Is this your comfort?
The cordial that you bring a wretched lady,
A woman lost among you, laughed at, scorned?
I will not wish you half my miseries;
I have more charity. But say I warned you:
Take heed, for heaven's sake, take heed, lest at once
The burden of my sorrows fall upon you.

WOLSEY
Madam, this is a mere distraction.
You turn the good we offer into envy.

QUEEN KATHERINE
You turn me into nothing! Woe upon you
And all such false professors. Would you have me--
If you have any justice, any pity,
If you be anything but churchmen's habits--
Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me?
Alas, has banished me his bed already,
His love, too, long ago. I am old, my lords,
And all the fellowship I hold now with him
Is only my obedience. What can happen
To me above this wretchedness? All your studies
Make me a curse like this.

CAMPEIUS  Your fears are worse.

QUEEN KATHERINE
Have I lived thus long--let me speak myself,
Since virtue finds no friends--a wife, a true one--
A woman, I dare say without vainglory,
Never yet branded with suspicion--
Have I with all my full affections
Still met the King, loved him next heav'n, obeyed him,
Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him,
Almost forgot my prayers to content him,
And am I thus rewarded? 'Tis not well, lords.
Bring me a constant woman to her husband,
One that ne'er dreamed a joy beyond his pleasure,
And to that woman, when she has done most,
Yet will I add an honor: a great patience.

WOLSEY
Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.

QUEEN KATHERINE
My lord, I dare not make myself so guilty
To give up willingly that noble title
Your master wed me to. Nothing but death
Shall e'er divorce my dignities.

WOLSEY  Pray hear me.

QUEEN KATHERINE
Would I had never trod this English earth
Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it!
You have angels' faces, but heaven knows your hearts.
What will become of me now, wretched lady?
I am the most unhappy woman living.
[To her Women.] Alas, poor wenches, where are now
your fortunes?
Shipwracked upon a kingdom where no pity,
No friends, no hope, no kindred weep for me,
Almost no grave allowed me, like the lily
That once was mistress of the field and flourished,
I'll hang my head and perish.

WOLSEY  If your Grace
Could but be brought to know our ends are honest,
You'd feel more comfort. Why should we, good lady,
Upon what cause, wrong you? Alas, our places,
The way of our profession, is against it.
We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em.
For goodness' sake, consider what you do,
How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly
Grow from the King's acquaintance by this carriage.
The hearts of princes kiss obedience,
So much they love it. But to stubborn spirits
They swell and grow as terrible as storms.
I know you have a gentle, noble temper,
A soul as even as a calm. Pray think us
Those we profess: peacemakers, friends, and servants.

CAMPEIUS
Madam, you'll find it so. You wrong your virtues
With these weak women's fears. A noble spirit,
As yours was put into you, ever casts
Such doubts, as false coin, from it. The King loves
you;
Beware you lose it not. For us, if you please
To trust us in your business, we are ready
To use our utmost studies in your service.

QUEEN KATHERINE
Do what you will, my lords, and pray forgive me
If I have used myself unmannerly.
You know I am a woman, lacking wit
To make a seemly answer to such persons.
Pray do my service to his Majesty.
He has my heart yet and shall have my prayers
While I shall have my life. Come, reverend fathers,
Bestow your counsels on me. She now begs
That little thought, when she set footing here,
She should have bought her dignities so dear.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter the Duke of Norfolk, Duke of Suffolk, Lord Surrey,
and Lord Chamberlain.]


NORFOLK
If you will now unite in your complaints
And force them with a constancy, the Cardinal
Cannot stand under them. If you omit
The offer of this time, I cannot promise
But that you shall sustain more new disgraces
With these you bear already.

SURREY  I am joyful
To meet the least occasion that may give me
Remembrance of my father-in-law the Duke,
To be revenged on him.

SUFFOLK  Which of the peers
Have uncontemned gone by him, or at least
Strangely neglected? When did he regard
The stamp of nobleness in any person
Out of himself?

CHAMBERLAIN  My lords, you speak your pleasures;
What he deserves of you and me I know;
What we can do to him--though now the time
Gives way to us--I much fear. If you cannot
Bar his access to th' King, never attempt
Anything on him, for he hath a witchcraft
Over the King in 's tongue.

NORFOLK  O, fear him not.
His spell in that is out. The King hath found
Matter against him that forever mars
The honey of his language. No, he's settled,
Not to come off, in his displeasure.

SURREY  Sir,
I should be glad to hear such news as this
Once every hour.

NORFOLK  Believe it, this is true.
In the divorce his contrary proceedings
Are all unfolded, wherein he appears
As I would wish mine enemy.

SURREY  How came
His practices to light?

SUFFOLK  Most strangely.

SURREY  O, how, how?

SUFFOLK
The Cardinal's letters to the Pope miscarried
And came to th' eye o' th' King, wherein was read
How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness
To stay the judgment o' th' divorce; for if
It did take place, "I do," quoth he, "perceive
My king is tangled in affection to
A creature of the Queen's, Lady Anne Bullen."

SURREY
Has the King this?

SUFFOLK  Believe it.

SURREY  Will this work?

CHAMBERLAIN
The King in this perceives him how he coasts
And hedges his own way. But in this point
All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic
After his patient's death: the King already
Hath married the fair lady.

SURREY  Would he had!

SUFFOLK
May you be happy in your wish, my lord,
For I profess you have it.

SURREY  Now, all my joy
Trace the conjunction!

SUFFOLK  My amen to 't.

NORFOLK  All men's.

SUFFOLK
There's order given for her coronation.
Marry, this is yet but young and may be left
To some ears unrecounted. But, my lords,
She is a gallant creature and complete
In mind and feature. I persuade me, from her
Will fall some blessing to this land which shall
In it be memorized.

SURREY  But will the King
Digest this letter of the Cardinal's?
The Lord forbid!

NORFOLK  Marry, amen!

SUFFOLK  No, no.
There be more wasps that buzz about his nose
Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius
Is stol'n away to Rome, hath ta'en no leave,
Has left the cause o' th' King unhandled, and
Is posted as the agent of our cardinal
To second all his plot. I do assure you
The King cried "Ha!" at this.

CHAMBERLAIN  Now God incense him,
And let him cry "Ha!" louder.

NORFOLK  But, my lord,
When returns Cranmer?

SUFFOLK
He is returned in his opinions, which
Have satisfied the King for his divorce,
Together with all famous colleges
Almost in Christendom. Shortly, I believe,
His second marriage shall be published, and
Her coronation. Katherine no more
Shall be called queen, but princess dowager
And widow to Prince Arthur.

NORFOLK  This same Cranmer's
A worthy fellow, and hath ta'en much pain
In the King's business.

SUFFOLK  He has, and we shall see him
For it an archbishop.

NORFOLK  So I hear.

SUFFOLK  'Tis so.

[Enter Wolsey and Cromwell, meeting.]

The Cardinal!

NORFOLK
Observe, observe; he's moody.	[They stand aside.]

WOLSEY  The packet, Cromwell;
Gave 't you the King?

CROMWELL  To his own hand, in 's bedchamber.

WOLSEY
Looked he o' th' inside of the paper?

CROMWELL  Presently
He did unseal them, and the first he viewed,
He did it with a serious mind; a heed
Was in his countenance. You he bade
Attend him here this morning.

WOLSEY  Is he ready
To come abroad?

CROMWELL  I think by this he is.

WOLSEY  Leave me awhile.	[Cromwell exits.]
[Aside.] It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon,
The French king's sister; he shall marry her.
Anne Bullen? No, I'll no Anne Bullens for him.
There's more in 't than fair visage. Bullen?
No, we'll no Bullens. Speedily I wish
To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Pembroke!

NORFOLK
He's discontented.

SUFFOLK  Maybe he hears the King
Does whet his anger to him.

SURREY  Sharp enough,
Lord, for thy justice!

WOLSEY, [aside]
The late queen's gentlewoman, a knight's daughter,
To be her mistress' mistress? The Queen's queen?
This candle burns not clear. 'Tis I must snuff it;
Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous
And well-deserving? Yet I know her for
A spleeny Lutheran, and not wholesome to
Our cause that she should lie i' th' bosom of
Our hard-ruled king. Again, there is sprung up
An heretic, an arch-one, Cranmer, one
Hath crawled into the favor of the King
And is his oracle.

NORFOLK  He is vexed at something.

SURREY
I would 'twere something that would fret the string,
The master-cord on 's heart.

SUFFOLK  The King, the King!

[Enter King, reading of a schedule, with Lovell
and Attendants.]


KING
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated
To his own portion! And what expense by th' hour
Seems to flow from him! How i' th' name of thrift
Does he rake this together? [Seeing the nobles.] Now,
my lords,
Saw you the Cardinal?

NORFOLK, [indicating Wolsey]  My lord, we have
Stood here observing him. Some strange commotion
Is in his brain. He bites his lip, and starts,
Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
Then lays his finger on his temple, straight
Springs out into fast gait, then stops again,
Strikes his breast hard, and anon he casts
His eye against the moon. In most strange postures
We have seen him set himself.

KING  It may well be
There is a mutiny in 's mind. This morning
Papers of state he sent me to peruse,
As I required, and wot you what I found?
There--on my conscience, put unwittingly--
Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing
The several parcels of his plate, his treasure,
Rich stuffs and ornaments of household, which
I find at such proud rate that it outspeaks
Possession of a subject.

NORFOLK  It's heaven's will!
Some spirit put this paper in the packet
To bless your eye withal.

KING, [studying Wolsey]  If we did think
His contemplation were above the Earth
And fixed on spiritual object, he should still
Dwell in his musings, but I am afraid
His thinkings are below the moon, not worth
His serious considering.
[King takes his seat, whispers Lovell,
who goes to the Cardinal.]

WOLSEY  Heaven forgive me!
Ever God bless your Highness.

KING  Good my lord,
You are full of heavenly stuff and bear the inventory
Of your best graces in your mind, the which
You were now running o'er. You have scarce time
To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span
To keep your earthly audit. Sure, in that
I deem you an ill husband, and am glad
To have you therein my companion.

WOLSEY  Sir,
For holy offices I have a time; a time
To think upon the part of business which
I bear i' th' state; and Nature does require
Her times of preservation, which perforce
I, her frail son, amongst my brethren mortal,
Must give my tendance to.

KING  You have said well.

WOLSEY
And ever may your Highness yoke together,
As I will lend you cause, my doing well
With my well saying.

KING  'Tis well said again,
And 'tis a kind of good deed to say well.
And yet words are no deeds. My father loved you;
He said he did, and with his deed did crown
His word upon you. Since I had my office
I have kept you next my heart, have not alone
Employed you where high profits might come home,
But pared my present havings to bestow
My bounties upon you.

WOLSEY, [aside]  What should this mean?

SURREY, [aside]
The Lord increase this business!

KING  Have I not made you
The prime man of the state? I pray you tell me
If what I now pronounce you have found true;
And, if you may confess it, say withal
If you are bound to us or no. What say you?

WOLSEY
My sovereign, I confess your royal graces,
Showered on me daily, have been more than could
My studied purposes requite, which went
Beyond all man's endeavors. My endeavors
Have ever come too short of my desires,
Yet filed with my abilities. Mine own ends
Have been mine so, that evermore they pointed
To th' good of your most sacred person and
The profit of the state. For your great graces
Heaped upon me, poor undeserver, I
Can nothing render but allegiant thanks,
My prayers to heaven for you, my loyalty,
Which ever has and ever shall be growing
Till death--that winter--kill it.

KING  Fairly answered.
A loyal and obedient subject is
Therein illustrated. The honor of it
Does pay the act of it, as, i' th' contrary,
The foulness is the punishment. I presume
That, as my hand has opened bounty to you,
My heart dropped love, my power rained honor, more
On you than any, so your hand and heart,
Your brain, and every function of your power
Should--notwithstanding that your bond of duty
As 'twere in love's particular--be more
To me, your friend, than any.

WOLSEY  I do profess
That for your Highness' good I ever labored
More than mine own, that am, have, and will be--
Though all the world should crack their duty to you
And throw it from their soul, though perils did
Abound as thick as thought could make 'em, and
Appear in forms more horrid--yet my duty,
As doth a rock against the chiding flood,
Should the approach of this wild river break,
And stand unshaken yours.

KING  'Tis nobly spoken.--
Take notice, lords: he has a loyal breast,
For you have seen him open 't.
[He hands Wolsey papers.]
Read o'er this,
And after, this; and then to breakfast with
What appetite you have.
[King exits, frowning upon the Cardinal;
the nobles throng after him smiling
and whispering, and exit.]

WOLSEY  What should this mean?
What sudden anger's this? How have I reaped it?
He parted frowning from me, as if ruin
Leaped from his eyes. So looks the chafed lion
Upon the daring huntsman that has galled him,
Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper--
I fear, the story of his anger.
[He reads one of the papers.]
'Tis so.
This paper has undone me. 'Tis th' accompt
Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together
For mine own ends--indeed, to gain the popedom
And fee my friends in Rome. O negligence,
Fit for a fool to fall by! What cross devil
Made me put this main secret in the packet
I sent the King? Is there no way to cure this?
No new device to beat this from his brains?
I know 'twill stir him strongly; yet I know
A way, if it take right, in spite of fortune
Will bring me off again.	[He looks at another paper.]
What's this? "To th' Pope"?
The letter, as I live, with all the business
I writ to 's Holiness. Nay then, farewell!
I have touched the highest point of all my greatness,
And from that full meridian of my glory
I haste now to my setting. I shall fall
Like a bright exhalation in the evening
And no man see me more.

[Enter to Wolsey the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, the
Earl of Surrey, and the Lord Chamberlain.]


NORFOLK
Hear the King's pleasure, cardinal, who commands
you
To render up the great seal presently
Into our hands, and to confine yourself
To Asher House, my Lord of Winchester's,
Till you hear further from his Highness.

WOLSEY  Stay.
Where's your commission, lords? Words cannot carry
Authority so weighty.

SUFFOLK  Who dare cross 'em,
Bearing the King's will from his mouth expressly?

WOLSEY
Till I find more than will or words to do it--
I mean your malice--know, officious lords,
I dare and must deny it. Now I feel
Of what coarse metal you are molded, envy;
How eagerly you follow my disgraces,
As if it fed you, and how sleek and wanton
You appear in everything may bring my ruin.
Follow your envious courses, men of malice;
You have Christian warrant for 'em, and no doubt
In time will find their fit rewards. That seal
You ask with such a violence, the King,
Mine and your master, with his own hand gave me;
Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honors,
During my life; and to confirm his goodness,
Tied it by letters patents. Now, who'll take it?

SURREY
The King that gave it.

WOLSEY  It must be himself, then.

SURREY
Thou art a proud traitor, priest.

WOLSEY  Proud lord, thou liest.
Within these forty hours Surrey durst better
Have burnt that tongue than said so.

SURREY  Thy ambition,
Thou scarlet sin, robbed this bewailing land
Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law.
The heads of all thy brother cardinals,
With thee and all thy best parts bound together,
Weighed not a hair of his. Plague of your policy!
You sent me Deputy for Ireland,
Far from his succor, from the King, from all
That might have mercy on the fault thou gav'st him,
Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity,
Absolved him with an ax.

WOLSEY  This, and all else
This talking lord can lay upon my credit,
I answer, is most false. The Duke by law
Found his deserts. How innocent I was
From any private malice in his end,
His noble jury and foul cause can witness.--
If I loved many words, lord, I should tell you
You have as little honesty as honor,
That in the way of loyalty and truth
Toward the King, my ever royal master,
Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be,
And all that love his follies.

SURREY  By my soul,
Your long coat, priest, protects you; thou shouldst feel
My sword i' th' life blood of thee else.--My lords,
Can you endure to hear this arrogance?
And from this fellow? If we live thus tamely,
To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet,
Farewell, nobility. Let his Grace go forward
And dare us with his cap, like larks.

WOLSEY  All goodness
Is poison to thy stomach.

SURREY  Yes, that goodness
Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one,
Into your own hands, card'nal, by extortion;
The goodness of your intercepted packets
You writ to th' Pope against the King. Your goodness,
Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.--
My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly noble,
As you respect the common good, the state
Of our despised nobility, our issues,
Whom, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen,
Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles
Collected from his life.--I'll startle you
Worse than the sacring bell when the brown wench
Lay kissing in your arms, Lord Cardinal.

WOLSEY
How much, methinks, I could despise this man,
But that I am bound in charity against it!

NORFOLK
Those articles, my lord, are in the King's hand;
But thus much, they are foul ones.

WOLSEY  So much fairer
And spotless shall mine innocence arise
When the King knows my truth.

SURREY  This cannot save you.
I thank my memory I yet remember
Some of these articles, and out they shall.
Now, if you can blush and cry "Guilty," cardinal,
You'll show a little honesty.

WOLSEY  Speak on, sir.
I dare your worst objections. If I blush,
It is to see a nobleman want manners.

SURREY
I had rather want those than my head. Have at you:
First, that without the King's assent or knowledge,
You wrought to be a legate, by which power
You maimed the jurisdiction of all bishops.

NORFOLK
Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else
To foreign princes, "ego et rex meus"
Was still inscribed, in which you brought the King
To be your servant.

SUFFOLK  Then, that without the knowledge
Either of king or council, when you went
Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold
To carry into Flanders the great seal.

SURREY
Item, you sent a large commission
To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude,
Without the King's will or the state's allowance,
A league between his Highness and Ferrara.

SUFFOLK
That out of mere ambition you have caused
Your holy hat to be stamped on the King's coin.

SURREY
Then, that you have sent innumerable substance--
By what means got I leave to your own conscience--
To furnish Rome and to prepare the ways
You have for dignities, to the mere undoing
Of all the kingdom. Many more there are
Which, since they are of you, and odious,
I will not taint my mouth with.

CHAMBERLAIN  O, my lord,
Press not a falling man too far! 'Tis virtue.
His faults lie open to the laws; let them,
Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him
So little of his great self.

SURREY  I forgive him.

SUFFOLK
Lord Cardinal, the King's further pleasure is--
Because all those things you have done of late
By your power legative within this kingdom
Fall into th' compass of a praemunire--
That therefore such a writ be sued against you,
To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be
Out of the King's protection. This is my charge.

NORFOLK
And so we'll leave you to your meditations
How to live better. For your stubborn answer
About the giving back the great seal to us,
The King shall know it and, no doubt, shall thank
you.
So, fare you well, my little good Lord Cardinal.

WOLSEY
So, farewell to the little good you bear me.
[All but Wolsey exit.]
Farewell? A long farewell to all my greatness!
This is the state of man: today he puts forth
The tender leaves of hopes; tomorrow blossoms
And bears his blushing honors thick upon him;
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
This many summers in a sea of glory,
But far beyond my depth. My high-blown pride
At length broke under me and now has left me,
Weary and old with service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream that must forever hide me.
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate you.
I feel my heart new opened. O, how wretched
Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favors!
There is betwixt that smile we would aspire to,
That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin,
More pangs and fears than wars or women have;
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.

[Enter Cromwell, standing amazed.]

Why, how now, Cromwell?

CROMWELL
I have no power to speak, sir.

WOLSEY  What, amazed
At my misfortunes? Can thy spirit wonder
A great man should decline? Nay, an you weep,
I am fall'n indeed.

CROMWELL  How does your Grace?

WOLSEY  Why, well.
Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.
I know myself now, and I feel within me
A peace above all earthly dignities,
A still and quiet conscience. The King has cured me--
I humbly thank his Grace--and from these shoulders,
These ruined pillars, out of pity, taken
A load would sink a navy: too much honor.
O, 'tis a burden, Cromwell, 'tis a burden
Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven.

CROMWELL
I am glad your Grace has made that right use of it.

WOLSEY
I hope I have. I am able now, methinks,
Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,
To endure more miseries and greater far
Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.
What news abroad?

CROMWELL  The heaviest and the worst
Is your displeasure with the King.

WOLSEY  God bless him.

CROMWELL
The next is that Sir Thomas More is chosen
Lord Chancellor in your place.

WOLSEY  That's somewhat sudden.
But he's a learned man. May he continue
Long in his Highness' favor and do justice
For truth's sake and his conscience, that his bones,
When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,
May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on him.
What more?

CROMWELL  That Cranmer is returned with welcome,
Installed Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

WOLSEY
That's news indeed.

CROMWELL  Last, that the Lady Anne,
Whom the King hath in secrecy long married,
This day was viewed in open as his queen,
Going to chapel, and the voice is now
Only about her coronation.

WOLSEY
There was the weight that pulled me down.
O Cromwell,
The King has gone beyond me. All my glories
In that one woman I have lost forever.
No sun shall ever usher forth mine honors,
Or gild again the noble troops that waited
Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell.
I am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now
To be thy lord and master. Seek the King;
That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him
What and how true thou art. He will advance thee;
Some little memory of me will stir him--
I know his noble nature--not to let
Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell,
Neglect him not. Make use now, and provide
For thine own future safety.

CROMWELL, [weeping]  O, my lord,
Must I then leave you? Must I needs forgo
So good, so noble, and so true a master?
Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.
The King shall have my service, but my prayers
Forever and forever shall be yours.

WOLSEY, [weeping]
Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
In all my miseries, but thou hast forced me,
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
Let's dry our eyes. And thus far hear me, Cromwell,
And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
Of me more must be heard of, say I taught thee;
Say Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honor,
Found thee a way, out of his wrack, to rise in,
A sure and safe one, though thy master missed it.
Mark but my fall and that that ruined me.
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition!
By that sin fell the angels; how can man, then,
The image of his maker, hope to win by it?
Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that hate thee.
Corruption wins not more than honesty.
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace
To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not.
Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
Thy God's, and truth's. Then if thou fall'st, O Cromwell,
Thou fall'st a blessed martyr.
Serve the King. And, prithee, lead me in.
There take an inventory of all I have
To the last penny; 'tis the King's. My robe
And my integrity to heaven is all
I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell,
Had I but served my God with half the zeal
I served my king, He would not in mine age
Have left me naked to mine enemies.

CROMWELL
Good sir, have patience.

WOLSEY  So I have. Farewell,
The hopes of court! My hopes in heaven do dwell.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter two Gentlemen, meeting one another, the First
Gentleman carrying a paper.]


FIRST GENTLEMAN
You're well met once again.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  So are you.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
You come to take your stand here and behold
The Lady Anne pass from her coronation?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
'Tis all my business. At our last encounter,
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
'Tis very true. But that time offered sorrow,
This general joy.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  'Tis well. The citizens
I am sure have shown at full their royal minds,
As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward
In celebration of this day with shows,
Pageants, and sights of honor.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Never greater,
Nor, I'll assure you, better taken, sir.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
May I be bold to ask what that contains,
That paper in your hand?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Yes, 'tis the list
Of those that claim their offices this day
By custom of the coronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
To be High Steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be Earl Marshal. You may read the rest.
[He offers him the paper.]

SECOND GENTLEMAN
I thank you, sir. Had I not known those customs,
I should have been beholding to your paper.
But I beseech you, what's become of Katherine,
The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Learned and reverend fathers of his order,
Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles off
From Ampthill, where the Princess lay, to which
She was often cited by them, but appeared not;
And, to be short, for not appearance and
The King's late scruple, by the main assent
Of all these learned men she was divorced,
And the late marriage made of none effect;
Since which she was removed to Kymmalton,
Where she remains now sick.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Alas, good lady!
[Hautboys. A lively flourish of trumpets.]
The trumpets sound. Stand close. The Queen is coming.

[Then, enter two Judges; Lord Chancellor, with purse
and mace before him. Choristers singing. Music.
Enter Mayor of London, bearing the mace. Then
Garter, in his coat of arms, and on his head he wore a
gilt copper crown.]


A royal train, believe me! These I know.

[Enter Marques Dorset, bearing a scepter of gold; on his
head a demi-coronal of gold. With him, the Earl of
Surrey, bearing the rod of silver with the dove, crowned
with an earl's coronet. Collars of S's.]


Who's that that bears the scepter?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Marques Dorset,
And that the Earl of Surrey with the rod.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
A bold brave gentleman.

[Enter Duke of Suffolk, in his robe of estate, his
coronet on his head, bearing a long white wand, as High
Steward. With him, the Duke of Norfolk, with the rod of
Marshalship, a coronet on his head. Collars of S's.]


That should be
The Duke of Suffolk.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  'Tis the same: High Steward.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
And that my Lord of Norfolk?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Yes.

[Enter a canopy, borne by four of the Cinque-ports,
under it the Queen in her robe, in her hair, richly
adorned with pearl, crowned. On each side her, the
Bishops of London and Winchester.]



SECOND GENTLEMAN  Heaven bless thee!
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever looked on.--
Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel.
Our king has all the Indies in his arms,
And more, and richer, when he strains that lady.
I cannot blame his conscience.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  They that bear
The cloth of honor over her are four barons
Of the Cinque-ports.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
Those men are happy, and so are all are near her.

[Enter the Old Duchess of Norfolk, in a coronal of
gold wrought with flowers, bearing the Queen's train.
Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain circlets of gold
without flowers.]


I take it she that carries up the train
Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
It is, and all the rest are countesses.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
Their coronets say so. These are stars indeed.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
And sometimes falling ones.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  No more of that.
[The Coronation procession exits, having
passed over the stage in order and state, and then
a great flourish of trumpets.]

[Enter a third Gentleman.]


FIRST GENTLEMAN
God save you, sir. Where have you been broiling?

THIRD GENTLEMAN
Among the crowd i' th' Abbey, where a finger
Could not be wedged in more. I am stifled
With the mere rankness of their joy.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  You saw
The ceremony?

THIRD GENTLEMAN  That I did.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  How was it?

THIRD GENTLEMAN
Well worth the seeing.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Good sir, speak it to us!

THIRD GENTLEMAN
As well as I am able. The rich stream
Of lords and ladies, having brought the Queen
To a prepared place in the choir, fell off
A distance from her, while her Grace sat down
To rest awhile, some half an hour or so,
In a rich chair of state, opposing freely
The beauty of her person to the people.
Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman
That ever lay by man, which when the people
Had the full view of, such a noise arose
As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest--
As loud and to as many tunes. Hats, cloaks,
Doublets, I think, flew up, and had their faces
Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
I never saw before. Great-bellied women
That had not half a week to go, like rams
In the old time of war, would shake the press
And make 'em reel before 'em. No man living
Could say "This is my wife there," all were woven
So strangely in one piece.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  But what followed?

THIRD GENTLEMAN
At length her Grace rose, and with modest paces
Came to the altar, where she kneeled and saintlike
Cast her fair eyes to heaven and prayed devoutly,
Then rose again and bowed her to the people.
When by the Archbishop of Canterbury
She had all the royal makings of a queen--
As, holy oil, Edward Confessor's crown,
The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems--
Laid nobly on her; which performed, the choir,
With all the choicest music of the kingdom,
Together sung Te Deum. So she parted,
And with the same full state paced back again
To York Place, where the feast is held.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Sir,
You must no more call it "York Place"; that's past,
For since the Cardinal fell, that title's lost.
'Tis now the King's and called "Whitehall."

THIRD GENTLEMAN  I know it,
But 'tis so lately altered that the old name
Is fresh about me.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  What two reverend bishops
Were those that went on each side of the Queen?

THIRD GENTLEMAN
Stokeley and Gardiner, the one of Winchester,
Newly preferred from the King's secretary,
The other London.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  He of Winchester
Is held no great good lover of the Archbishop's,
The virtuous Cranmer.

THIRD GENTLEMAN  All the land knows that.
However, yet there is no great breach. When it comes,
Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
Who may that be, I pray you?

THIRD GENTLEMAN  Thomas Cromwell,
A man in much esteem with th' King, and truly
A worthy friend. The King has made him
Master o' th' Jewel House,
And one already of the Privy Council.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
He will deserve more.

THIRD GENTLEMAN  Yes, without all doubt.
Come, gentlemen, you shall go my way,
Which is to th' court, and there you shall be my
guests,
Something I can command. As I walk thither,
I'll tell you more.

BOTH  You may command us, sir.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Katherine Dowager, sick, led between Griffith, her
gentleman usher, and Patience, her woman.]


GRIFFITH
How does your Grace?

KATHERINE  O Griffith, sick to death.
My legs like loaden branches bow to th' earth,
Willing to leave their burden. Reach a chair.
[She sits.]
So. Now, methinks, I feel a little ease.
Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou ledst me,
That the great child of honor, Cardinal Wolsey,
Was dead?

GRIFFITH  Yes, madam, but I think your Grace,
Out of the pain you suffered, gave no ear to 't.

KATHERINE
Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died.
If well, he stepped before me happily
For my example.

GRIFFITH  Well, the voice goes, madam;
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Arrested him at York and brought him forward,
As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,
He fell sick suddenly and grew so ill
He could not sit his mule.

KATHERINE  Alas, poor man!

GRIFFITH
At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester,
Lodged in the abbey, where the reverend abbot
With all his convent honorably received him;
To whom he gave these words: "O Father Abbot,
An old man, broken with the storms of state,
Is come to lay his weary bones among you.
Give him a little earth, for charity."
So went to bed, where eagerly his sickness
Pursued him still; and three nights after this,
About the hour of eight, which he himself
Foretold should be his last, full of repentance,
Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows,
He gave his honors to the world again,
His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.

KATHERINE
So may he rest. His faults lie gently on him!
Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
And yet with charity. He was a man
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
Himself with princes; one that by suggestion
Tied all the kingdom. Simony was fair play.
His own opinion was his law. I' th' presence
He would say untruths, and be ever double
Both in his words and meaning. He was never,
But where he meant to ruin, pitiful.
His promises were, as he then was, mighty,
But his performance, as he is now, nothing.
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
The clergy ill example.

GRIFFITH  Noble madam,
Men's evil manners live in brass; their virtues
We write in water. May it please your Highness
To hear me speak his good now?

KATHERINE  Yes, good Griffith;
I were malicious else.

GRIFFITH  This cardinal,
Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly
Was fashioned to much honor. From his cradle
He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one:
Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading;
Lofty and sour to them that loved him not,
But, to those men that sought him, sweet as summer.
And though he were unsatisfied in getting,
Which was a sin, yet in bestowing, madam,
He was most princely. Ever witness for him
Those twins of learning that he raised in you,
Ipswich and Oxford, one of which fell with him,
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it;
The other, though unfinished, yet so famous,
So excellent in art, and still so rising,
That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue.
His overthrow heaped happiness upon him,
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
And found the blessedness of being little.
And, to add greater honors to his age
Than man could give him, he died fearing God.

KATHERINE
After my death I wish no other herald,
No other speaker of my living actions,
To keep mine honor from corruption
But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.
Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me,
With thy religious truth and modesty,
Now in his ashes honor. Peace be with him!--
Patience, be near me still, and set me lower.
I have not long to trouble thee.--Good Griffith,
Cause the musicians play me that sad note
I named my knell, whilst I sit meditating
On that celestial harmony I go to.
[Sad and solemn music.]

GRIFFITH
She is asleep. Good wench, let's sit down quiet,
For fear we wake her. Softly, gentle Patience.
[They sit.]

[The Vision.

Enter, solemnly tripping one after another, six
Personages clad in white robes, wearing on their
heads garlands of bays, and golden vizards on their
faces, branches of bays or palm in their hands. They
first congee unto her, then dance; and, at certain
changes, the first two hold a spare garland over her
head, at which the other four make reverent curtsies.
Then the two that held the garland deliver the same
to the other next two, who observe the same order in
their changes and holding the garland over her head;
which done, they deliver the same garland to the last
two, who likewise observe the same order. At which,
as it were by inspiration, she makes in her sleep
signs of rejoicing and holdeth up her hands to
heaven; and so, in their dancing, vanish, carrying
the garland with them.]

[The music continues.]

KATHERINE, [waking]
Spirits of peace, where are you? Are you all gone,
And leave me here in wretchedness behind you?

GRIFFITH
Madam, we are here.

KATHERINE  It is not you I call for.
Saw you none enter since I slept?

GRIFFITH  None, madam.

KATHERINE
No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop
Invite me to a banquet, whose bright faces
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?
They promised me eternal happiness
And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel
I am not worthy yet to wear. I shall, assuredly.

GRIFFITH
I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams
Possess your fancy.

KATHERINE  Bid the music leave.
They are harsh and heavy to me.	[Music ceases.]

PATIENCE, [aside to Griffith]  Do you note
How much her Grace is altered on the sudden?
How long her face is drawn? How pale she looks,
And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes.

GRIFFITH, [aside to Patience]
She is going, wench. Pray, pray.

PATIENCE  Heaven comfort her!

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER, [to Katherine]
An 't like your Grace--

KATHERINE  You are a saucy fellow.
Deserve we no more reverence?

GRIFFITH, [to Messenger]  You are to blame,
Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,
To use so rude behavior. Go to. Kneel.

MESSENGER, [kneeling]
I humbly do entreat your Highness' pardon.
My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying
A gentleman sent from the King to see you.

KATHERINE
Admit him entrance, Griffith.	[Messenger rises.]
But this fellow
Let me ne'er see again.	[Messenger exits.]

[Enter Lord Capuchius.]

If my sight fail not,
You should be Lord Ambassador from the Emperor,
My royal nephew, and your name Capuchius.

CAPUCHIUS
Madam, the same. Your servant.

KATHERINE  O my lord,
The times and titles now are altered strangely
With me since first you knew me. But I pray you,
What is your pleasure with me?

CAPUCHIUS  Noble lady,
First, mine own service to your Grace; the next,
The King's request that I would visit you,
Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
Sends you his princely commendations,
And heartily entreats you take good comfort.

KATHERINE
O, my good lord, that comfort comes too late;
'Tis like a pardon after execution.
That gentle physic given in time had cured me.
But now I am past all comforts here but prayers.
How does his Highness?

CAPUCHIUS  Madam, in good health.

KATHERINE
So may he ever do, and ever flourish,
When I shall dwell with worms, and my poor name
Banished the kingdom.--Patience, is that letter
I caused you write yet sent away?

PATIENCE  No, madam.
[She presents a paper to Katherine, who gives
it to Capuchius.]

KATHERINE
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
This to my lord the King--

CAPUCHIUS  Most willing, madam.

KATHERINE
In which I have commended to his goodness
The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter--
The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!--
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding--
She is young and of a noble, modest nature;
I hope she will deserve well--and a little
To love her for her mother's sake that loved him,
Heaven knows how dearly. My next poor petition
Is that his noble Grace would have some pity
Upon my wretched women, that so long
Have followed both my fortunes faithfully,
Of which there is not one, I dare avow--
And now I should not lie--but will deserve,
For virtue and true beauty of the soul,
For honesty and decent carriage,
A right good husband. Let him be a noble;
And sure those men are happy that shall have 'em.
The last is for my men--they are the poorest,
But poverty could never draw 'em from me--
That they may have their wages duly paid 'em,
And something over to remember me by.
If heaven had pleased to have given me longer life
And able means, we had not parted thus.
These are the whole contents. And, good my lord,
By that you love the dearest in this world,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the King
To do me this last right.

CAPUCHIUS  By heaven, I will,
Or let me lose the fashion of a man!

KATHERINE
I thank you, honest lord. Remember me
In all humility unto his Highness.
Say his long trouble now is passing
Out of this world. Tell him in death I blessed him,
For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim. Farewell,
My lord.--Griffith, farewell.--Nay, Patience,
You must not leave me yet. I must to bed;
Call in more women. When I am dead, good wench,
Let me be used with honor. Strew me over
With maiden flowers, that all the world may know
I was a chaste wife to my grave. Embalm me,
Then lay me forth. Although unqueened, yet like
A queen and daughter to a king inter me.
I can no more.
[They exit, leading Katherine.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, a Page with a
torch before him, met by Sir Thomas Lovell.]


GARDINER
It's one o'clock, boy, is 't not?

PAGE  It hath struck.

GARDINER
These should be hours for necessities,
Not for delights; times to repair our nature
With comforting repose, and not for us
To waste these times.--Good hour of night, Sir
Thomas.
Whither so late?

LOVELL  Came you from the King, my lord?

GARDINER
I did, Sir Thomas, and left him at primero
With the Duke of Suffolk.

LOVELL  I must to him too,
Before he go to bed. I'll take my leave.

GARDINER
Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What's the matter?
It seems you are in haste. An if there be
No great offense belongs to 't, give your friend
Some touch of your late business. Affairs that walk,
As they say spirits do, at midnight have
In them a wilder nature than the business
That seeks dispatch by day.

LOVELL  My lord, I love you,
And durst commend a secret to your ear
Much weightier than this work. The Queen's in
labor--
They say in great extremity--and feared
She'll with the labor end.

GARDINER  The fruit she goes with
I pray for heartily, that it may find
Good time and live; but for the stock, Sir Thomas,
I wish it grubbed up now.

LOVELL  Methinks I could
Cry the amen, and yet my conscience says
She's a good creature and, sweet lady, does
Deserve our better wishes.

GARDINER  But, sir, sir,
Hear me, Sir Thomas. You're a gentleman
Of mine own way. I know you wise, religious;
And let me tell you, it will ne'er be well,
'Twill not, Sir Thomas Lovell, take 't of me,
Till Cranmer, Cromwell--her two hands--and she
Sleep in their graves.

LOVELL  Now, sir, you speak of two
The most remarked i' th' kingdom. As for Cromwell,
Besides that of the Jewel House, is made Master
O' th' Rolls and the King's secretary; further, sir,
Stands in the gap and trade of more preferments,
With which the time will load him. Th' Archbishop
Is the King's hand and tongue, and who dare speak
One syllable against him?

GARDINER  Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
There are that dare, and I myself have ventured
To speak my mind of him. And indeed this day,
Sir--I may tell it you, I think--I have
Incensed the lords o' th' Council that he is--
For so I know he is, they know he is--
A most arch heretic, a pestilence
That does infect the land; with which they, moved,
Have broken with the King, who hath so far
Given ear to our complaint, of his great grace
And princely care foreseeing those fell mischiefs
Our reasons laid before him, hath commanded
Tomorrow morning to the Council board
He be convented. He's a rank weed, Sir Thomas,
And we must root him out. From your affairs
I hinder you too long. Goodnight, Sir Thomas.

LOVELL
Many good nights, my lord. I rest your servant.
[Gardiner and Page exit.]

[Enter King and Suffolk.]


KING
Charles, I will play no more tonight.
My mind's not on 't; you are too hard for me.

SUFFOLK
Sir, I did never win of you before.

KING  But little, Charles,
Nor shall not when my fancy's on my play.--
Now, Lovell, from the Queen what is the news?

LOVELL
I could not personally deliver to her
What you commanded me, but by her woman
I sent your message, who returned her thanks
In the great'st humbleness, and desired your Highness
Most heartily to pray for her.

KING  What sayst thou, ha?
To pray for her? What, is she crying out?

LOVELL
So said her woman, and that her suff'rance made
Almost each pang a death.

KING  Alas, good lady!

SUFFOLK
God safely quit her of her burden, and
With gentle travail, to the gladding of
Your Highness with an heir!

KING  'Tis midnight, Charles.
Prithee, to bed, and in thy prayers remember
Th' estate of my poor queen. Leave me alone,
For I must think of that which company
Would not be friendly to.

SUFFOLK  I wish your Highness
A quiet night, and my good mistress will
Remember in my prayers.

KING  Charles, good night.
[Suffolk exits.]

[Enter Sir Anthony Denny.]

Well, sir, what follows?

DENNY
Sir, I have brought my lord the Archbishop,
As you commanded me.

KING  Ha! Canterbury?

DENNY
Ay, my good lord.

KING  'Tis true. Where is he, Denny?

DENNY
He attends your Highness' pleasure.

KING  Bring him to us.
[Denny exits.]

LOVELL, [aside]
This is about that which the Bishop spake.
I am happily come hither.

[Enter Cranmer and Denny.]


KING
Avoid the gallery.	[Lovell seems to stay.]
Ha! I have said. Be gone!
What!	[Lovell and Denny exit.]

CRANMER, [aside]  I am fearful. Wherefore frowns he thus?
'Tis his aspect of terror. All's not well.

KING
How now, my lord? You do desire to know
Wherefore I sent for you.

CRANMER, [kneeling]  It is my duty
T' attend your Highness' pleasure.

KING  Pray you arise,
My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury.
Come, you and I must walk a turn together.
I have news to tell you. Come, come, give me your
hand.	[Cranmer rises.]
Ah, my good lord, I grieve at what I speak,
And am right sorry to repeat what follows.
I have, and most unwillingly, of late
Heard many grievous--I do say, my lord,
Grievous--complaints of you, which, being
considered,
Have moved us and our Council that you shall
This morning come before us, where I know
You cannot with such freedom purge yourself
But that, till further trial in those charges
Which will require your answer, you must take
Your patience to you and be well contented
To make your house our Tower. You a brother of us,
It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
Would come against you.

CRANMER, [kneeling]  I humbly thank your
Highness,
And am right glad to catch this good occasion
Most throughly to be winnowed, where my chaff
And corn shall fly asunder. For I know
There's none stands under more calumnious tongues
Than I myself, poor man.

KING  Stand up, good Canterbury!
Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted
In us, thy friend. Give me thy hand. Stand up.
[Cranmer rises.]
Prithee, let's walk. Now by my halidom,
What manner of man are you? My lord, I looked
You would have given me your petition that
I should have ta'en some pains to bring together
Yourself and your accusers and to have heard you
Without endurance further.

CRANMER  Most dread liege,
The good I stand on is my truth and honesty.
If they shall fail, I with mine enemies
Will triumph o'er my person, which I weigh not,
Being of those virtues vacant. I fear nothing
What can be said against me.

KING  Know you not
How your state stands i' th' world, with the whole
world?
Your enemies are many and not small; their practices
Must bear the same proportion, and not ever
The justice and the truth o' th' question carries
The due o' th' verdict with it. At what ease
Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt
To swear against you? Such things have been done.
You are potently opposed, and with a malice
Of as great size. Ween you of better luck,
I mean in perjured witness, than your master,
Whose minister you are, whiles here he lived
Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to.
You take a precipice for no leap of danger
And woo your own destruction.

CRANMER  God and your Majesty
Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
The trap is laid for me.

KING  Be of good cheer.
They shall no more prevail than we give way to.
Keep comfort to you, and this morning see
You do appear before them. If they shall chance,
In charging you with matters, to commit you,
The best persuasions to the contrary
Fail not to use, and with what vehemency
Th' occasion shall instruct you. If entreaties
Will render you no remedy, this ring
Deliver them, and your appeal to us
There make before them.	[He gives Cranmer a ring.]
[Aside.] Look, the good man weeps!
He's honest, on mine honor! God's blest mother,
I swear he is truehearted, and a soul
None better in my kingdom.--Get you gone,
And do as I have bid you.	[Cranmer exits.]
He has strangled
His language in his tears.

LOVELL [(within)]  Come back! What mean you?

[Enter Old Lady, followed by Lovell.]


OLD LADY
I'll not come back! The tidings that I bring
Will make my boldness manners.--Now, good angels
Fly o'er thy royal head and shade thy person
Under their blessed wings!

KING  Now by thy looks
I guess thy message. Is the Queen delivered?
Say "Ay, and of a boy."

OLD LADY  Ay, ay, my liege,
And of a lovely boy. The God of heaven
Both now and ever bless her! 'Tis a girl
Promises boys hereafter. Sir, your queen
Desires your visitation, and to be
Acquainted with this stranger. 'Tis as like you
As cherry is to cherry.

KING  Lovell.

LOVELL  Sir.

KING
Give her an hundred marks. I'll to the Queen.
[King exits.]

OLD LADY
An hundred marks? By this light, I'll ha' more.
An ordinary groom is for such payment.
I will have more or scold it out of him.
Said I for this the girl was like to him?
I'll have more or else unsay 't. And now,
While 'tis hot, I'll put it to the issue.
[Old Lady exits, with Lovell.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury. (Pages,
Footboys, Grooms, and other servants attend at the
Council door.)]


CRANMER
I hope I am not too late, and yet the gentleman
That was sent to me from the Council prayed me
To make great haste.	[He tries the door.]
All fast? What means this? Ho!
Who waits there?

[Enter Keeper.]

Sure you know me!

KEEPER  Yes, my lord,
But yet I cannot help you.

CRANMER  Why?

KEEPER
Your Grace must wait till you be called for.

CRANMER  So.

[Enter Doctor Butts.]


BUTTS, [aside]
This is a piece of malice. I am glad
I came this way so happily. The King
Shall understand it presently.	[Butts exits.]

CRANMER, [aside]  'Tis Butts,
The King's physician. As he passed along
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me!
Pray heaven he sound not my disgrace. For certain
This is of purpose laid by some that hate me--
God turn their hearts! I never sought their malice--
To quench mine honor. They would shame to make me
Wait else at door, a fellow councillor,
'Mong boys, grooms, and lackeys. But their pleasures
Must be fulfilled, and I attend with patience.

[Enter the King and Butts at a window above.]


BUTTS
I'll show your Grace the strangest sight.

KING  What's that,
Butts?

BUTTS
I think your Highness saw this many a day.

KING
Body o' me, where is it?

BUTTS  There, my lord:
The high promotion of his Grace of Canterbury,
Who holds his state at door, 'mongst pursuivants,
Pages, and footboys.

KING  Ha! 'Tis he indeed.
Is this the honor they do one another?
'Tis well there's one above 'em yet. I had thought
They had parted so much honesty among 'em--
At least good manners--as not thus to suffer
A man of his place, and so near our favor,
To dance attendance on their Lordships' pleasures,
And at the door, too, like a post with packets.
By holy Mary, Butts, there's knavery!
Let 'em alone, and draw the curtain close.
We shall hear more anon.	[They draw the curtain.]

[A council table brought in with chairs and stools and
placed under the state. Enter Lord Chancellor, places
himself at the upper end of the table on the left hand, a
seat being left void above him, as for Canterbury's seat.
Duke of Suffolk, Duke of Norfolk, Surrey, Lord
Chamberlain, Gardiner seat themselves in order on each
side, Cromwell at lower end as secretary.]


CHANCELLOR
Speak to the business, Master Secretary.
Why are we met in council?

CROMWELL  Please your honors,
The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury.

GARDINER
Has he had knowledge of it?

CROMWELL  Yes.

NORFOLK, [to Keeper]  Who waits there?

KEEPER
Without, my noble lords?

GARDINER  Yes.

KEEPER  My lord Archbishop,
And has done half an hour, to know your pleasures.

CHANCELLOR
Let him come in.

KEEPER, [at door]  Your Grace may enter now.
[Cranmer approaches the council table.]

CHANCELLOR
My good lord Archbishop, I'm very sorry
To sit here at this present and behold
That chair stand empty. But we all are men,
In our own natures frail, and capable
Of our flesh--few are angels--out of which frailty
And want of wisdom you, that best should teach us,
Have misdemeaned yourself, and not a little,
Toward the King first, then his laws, in filling
The whole realm, by your teaching and your
chaplains'--
For so we are informed--with new opinions,
Divers and dangerous, which are heresies
And, not reformed, may prove pernicious.

GARDINER
Which reformation must be sudden too,
My noble lords; for those that tame wild horses
Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle,
But stop their mouths with stubborn bits, and spur 'em
Till they obey the manage. If we suffer,
Out of our easiness and childish pity
To one man's honor, this contagious sickness,
Farewell, all physic. And what follows then?
Commotions, uproars, with a general taint
Of the whole state, as of late days our neighbors,
The upper Germany, can dearly witness,
Yet freshly pitied in our memories.

CRANMER
My good lords, hitherto, in all the progress
Both of my life and office, I have labored,
And with no little study, that my teaching
And the strong course of my authority
Might go one way and safely; and the end
Was ever to do well. Nor is there living--
I speak it with a single heart, my lords--
A man that more detests, more stirs against,
Both in his private conscience and his place,
Defacers of a public peace than I do.
Pray heaven the King may never find a heart
With less allegiance in it! Men that make
Envy and crooked malice nourishment
Dare bite the best. I do beseech your Lordships
That, in this case of justice, my accusers,
Be what they will, may stand forth face to face
And freely urge against me.

SUFFOLK  Nay, my lord,
That cannot be. You are a councillor,
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.

GARDINER
My lord, because we have business of more moment,
We will be short with you. 'Tis his Highness' pleasure,
And our consent, for better trial of you
From hence you be committed to the Tower,
Where, being but a private man again,
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly--
More than, I fear, you are provided for.

CRANMER
Ah, my good Lord of Winchester, I thank you.
You are always my good friend. If your will pass,
I shall both find your Lordship judge and juror,
You are so merciful. I see your end:
'Tis my undoing. Love and meekness, lord,
Become a churchman better than ambition.
Win straying souls with modesty again;
Cast none away. That I shall clear myself,
Lay all the weight you can upon my patience,
I make as little doubt as you do conscience
In doing daily wrongs. I could say more,
But reverence to your calling makes me modest.

GARDINER
My lord, my lord, you are a sectary.
That's the plain truth. Your painted gloss discovers,
To men that understand you, words and weakness.

CROMWELL
My Lord of Winchester, you're a little,
By your good favor, too sharp. Men so noble,
However faulty, yet should find respect
For what they have been. 'Tis a cruelty
To load a falling man.

GARDINER  Good Master Secretary--
I cry your Honor mercy--you may worst
Of all this table say so.

CROMWELL  Why, my lord?

GARDINER
Do not I know you for a favorer
Of this new sect? You are not sound.

CROMWELL  Not sound?

GARDINER
Not sound, I say.

CROMWELL  Would you were half so honest!
Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears.

GARDINER
I shall remember this bold language.

CROMWELL  Do.
Remember your bold life too.

CHANCELLOR  This is too much!
Forbear, for shame, my lords.

GARDINER  I have done.

CROMWELL  And I.

CHANCELLOR, [to Cranmer]
Then thus for you, my lord: it stands agreed,
I take it, by all voices, that forthwith
You be conveyed to th' Tower a prisoner,
There to remain till the King's further pleasure
Be known unto us.--Are you all agreed, lords?

ALL
We are.

CRANMER  Is there no other way of mercy
But I must needs to th' Tower, my lords?

GARDINER  What other
Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome.
Let some o' th' guard be ready there.

[Enter the Guard.]


CRANMER  For me?
Must I go like a traitor thither?

GARDINER  Receive him,
And see him safe i' th' Tower.

CRANMER  Stay, good my lords,
I have a little yet to say. Look there, my lords.
[He holds out the ring.]
By virtue of that ring, I take my cause
Out of the grips of cruel men and give it
To a most noble judge, the King my master.

CHAMBERLAIN
This is the King's ring.

SURREY  'Tis no counterfeit.

SUFFOLK
'Tis the right ring, by heaven! I told you all,
When we first put this dangerous stone a-rolling,
'Twould fall upon ourselves.

NORFOLK  Do you think, my lords,
The King will suffer but the little finger
Of this man to be vexed?

CHAMBERLAIN  'Tis now too certain.
How much more is his life in value with him!
Would I were fairly out on 't!

CROMWELL  My mind gave me,
In seeking tales and informations
Against this man, whose honesty the devil
And his disciples only envy at,
You blew the fire that burns you. Now, have at you!

[Enter King, frowning on them; takes his seat.]


GARDINER
Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven
In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince,
Not only good and wise, but most religious;
One that in all obedience makes the Church
The chief aim of his honor, and to strengthen
That holy duty out of dear respect,
His royal self in judgment comes to hear
The cause betwixt her and this great offender.

KING
You were ever good at sudden commendations,
Bishop of Winchester. But know I come not
To hear such flattery now, and in my presence
They are too thin and base to hide offenses.
To me you cannot reach. You play the spaniel,
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me;
But whatsoe'er thou tak'st me for, I'm sure
Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.--
Good man, sit down.	[Cranmer takes his seat.]
Now let me see the proudest
He, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee.
By all that's holy, he had better starve
Than but once think this place becomes thee not.

SURREY
May it please your Grace--

KING  No, sir, it does not please
me.
I had thought I had had men of some understanding
And wisdom of my Council, but I find none.
Was it discretion, lords, to let this man,
This good man--few of you deserve that title--
This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy
At chamber door? And one as great as you are?
Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission
Bid you so far forget yourselves? I gave you
Power as he was a councillor to try him,
Not as a groom. There's some of you, I see,
More out of malice than integrity,
Would try him to the utmost, had you mean,
Which you shall never have while I live.

CHANCELLOR  Thus far,
My most dread sovereign, may it like your Grace
To let my tongue excuse all. What was purposed
Concerning his imprisonment was rather,
If there be faith in men, meant for his trial
And fair purgation to the world than malice,
I'm sure, in me.

KING  Well, well, my lords, respect him.
Take him, and use him well; he's worthy of it.
I will say thus much for him: if a prince
May be beholding to a subject, I
Am, for his love and service, so to him.
Make me no more ado, but all embrace him.
Be friends, for shame, my lords.
[They embrace Cranmer.]
My Lord of Canterbury,
I have a suit which you must not deny me:
That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism.
You must be godfather and answer for her.

CRANMER
The greatest monarch now alive may glory
In such an honor. How may I deserve it,
That am a poor and humble subject to you?

KING  Come, come, my lord, you'd spare your spoons.
You shall have two noble partners with you: the
old Duchess of Norfolk and Lady Marquess Dorset.
Will these please you?--
Once more, my lord of Winchester, I charge you,
Embrace and love this man.

GARDINER  With a true heart
And brother-love I do it.	[He embraces Cranmer.]

CRANMER, [weeping]  And let heaven
Witness how dear I hold this confirmation.

KING
Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart.
The common voice, I see, is verified
Of thee, which says thus: "Do my Lord of Canterbury
A shrewd turn, and he's your friend forever."--
Come, lords, we trifle time away. I long
To have this young one made a Christian.
As I have made you one, lords, one remain.
So I grow stronger, you more honor gain.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Noise and tumult within. Enter Porter and his Man,
carrying cudgels.]


PORTER  You'll leave your noise anon, you rascals! Do
you take the court for Parish Garden? You rude
slaves, leave your gaping!

ONE, [within]  Good Master Porter, I belong to th'
larder.

PORTER  Belong to th' gallows and be hanged, you rogue!
Is this a place to roar in?--Fetch me a dozen crab-tree
staves, and strong ones. These are but switches
to 'em.--I'll scratch your heads! You must be seeing
christenings? Do you look for ale and cakes here,
you rude rascals?

PORTER'S MAN
Pray, sir, be patient. 'Tis as much impossible--
Unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons--
To scatter 'em as 'tis to make 'em sleep
On May Day morning, which will never be.
We may as well push against Paul's as stir 'em.

PORTER  How got they in, and be hanged?

PORTER'S MAN
Alas, I know not. How gets the tide in?
As much as one sound cudgel of four foot--
You see the poor remainder--could distribute,
I made no spare, sir.

PORTER  You did nothing, sir.

PORTER'S MAN
I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colbrand,
To mow 'em down before me; but if I spared any
That had a head to hit, either young or old,
He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker,
Let me ne'er hope to see a chine again--
And that I would not for a cow, God save her!

ONE, [within]  Do you hear, Master Porter?

PORTER  I shall be with you presently, good master
puppy.-- Keep the door close, sirrah.

PORTER'S MAN  What would you have me do?

PORTER  What should you do but knock 'em down by
th' dozens? Is this Moorfields to muster in? Or have
we some strange Indian with the great tool come to
court, the women so besiege us? Bless me, what a
fry of fornication is at door! On my Christian conscience,
this one christening will beget a thousand;
here will be father, godfather, and all together.

PORTER'S MAN  The spoons will be the bigger, sir. There is
a fellow somewhat near the door--he should be a
brazier by his face, for, o' my conscience, twenty of
the dog days now reign in 's nose. All that stand
about him are under the line; they need no other
penance. That fire-drake did I hit three times on the
head, and three times was his nose discharged
against me. He stands there like a mortar-piece, to
blow us. There was a haberdasher's wife of small
wit near him that railed upon me till her pinked
porringer fell off her head for kindling such a
combustion in the state. I missed the meteor once
and hit that woman, who cried out "Clubs!" when I
might see from far some forty truncheoners draw to
her succor, which were the hope o' th' Strand, where
she was quartered. They fell on; I made good my
place. At length they came to th' broomstaff to me;
I defied 'em still, when suddenly a file of boys behind
'em, loose shot, delivered such a shower of
pibbles that I was fain to draw mine honor in and
let 'em win the work. The devil was amongst 'em, I
think, surely.

PORTER  These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse
and fight for bitten apples, that no audience
but the tribulation of Tower Hill or the limbs of
Limehouse, their dear brothers, are able to
endure. I have some of 'em in Limbo Patrum, and
there they are like to dance these three days, besides
the running banquet of two beadles that is to come.

[Enter Lord Chamberlain.]


CHAMBERLAIN
Mercy o' me, what a multitude are here!
They grow still too. From all parts they are coming,
As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters,
These lazy knaves?--You've made a fine hand, fellows!
There's a trim rabble let in. Are all these
Your faithful friends o' th' suburbs? We shall have
Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,
When they pass back from the christening!

PORTER  An 't please
your Honor,
We are but men, and what so many may do,
Not being torn a-pieces, we have done.
An army cannot rule 'em.

CHAMBERLAIN  As I live,
If the King blame me for 't, I'll lay you all
By th' heels, and suddenly, and on your heads
Clap round fines for neglect. You're lazy knaves,
And here you lie baiting of bombards, when
You should do service.	[Trumpets.]
Hark, the trumpets sound!
They're come already from the christening.
Go break among the press, and find a way out
To let the troop pass fairly, or I'll find
A Marshalsea shall hold you play these two months.

PORTER
Make way there for the Princess!

PORTER'S MAN  You great fellow,
Stand close up, or I'll make your head ache.

PORTER
You i' th' camlet, get up o' th' rail!
I'll peck you o'er the pales else.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Trumpets, sounding. Then two Aldermen, Lord
Mayor, Garter, Cranmer, Duke of Norfolk with his
marshal's staff, Duke of Suffolk, two Noblemen bearing
great standing bowls for the christening gifts; then four
Noblemen bearing a canopy, under which the Duchess
of Norfolk, godmother, bearing the child richly habited
in a mantle, etc., train borne by a Lady. Then follows the
Marchioness Dorset, the other godmother, and Ladies.
The troop pass once about the stage, and Garter speaks.]


GARTER  Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send
prosperous life, long, and ever happy, to the high
and mighty princess of England, Elizabeth.

[Flourish. Enter King and Guard.]


CRANMER, [kneeling]
And to your royal Grace and the good queen,
My noble partners and myself thus pray
All comfort, joy, in this most gracious lady
Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy
May hourly fall upon you!

KING  Thank you, good lord
Archbishop.
What is her name?

CRANMER  Elizabeth.

KING  Stand up, lord.
[Cranmer stands.]
With this kiss take my blessing.	[King kisses infant.]
God protect thee,
Into whose hand I give thy life.

CRANMER  Amen.

KING, [to the two godmothers]
My noble gossips, you've been too prodigal.
I thank you heartily; so shall this lady
When she has so much English.

CRANMER  Let me speak, sir,
For heaven now bids me; and the words I utter
Let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth.
This royal infant--heaven still move about her!--
Though in her cradle, yet now promises
Upon this land a thousand thousand blessings,
Which time shall bring to ripeness. She shall be--
But few now living can behold that goodness--
A pattern to all princes living with her
And all that shall succeed. Saba was never
More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue
Than this pure soul shall be. All princely graces
That mold up such a mighty piece as this is,
With all the virtues that attend the good,
Shall still be doubled on her. Truth shall nurse her;
Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her.
She shall be loved and feared. Her own shall bless her;
Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn
And hang their heads with sorrow. Good grows with
her.
In her days every man shall eat in safety
Under his own vine what he plants and sing
The merry songs of peace to all his neighbors.
God shall be truly known, and those about her
From her shall read the perfect ways of honor
And by those claim their greatness, not by blood.
Nor shall this peace sleep with her; but, as when
The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix,
Her ashes new create another heir
As great in admiration as herself,
So shall she leave her blessedness to one,
When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness,
Who from the sacred ashes of her honor
Shall starlike rise as great in fame as she was
And so stand fixed. Peace, plenty, love, truth, terror,
That were the servants to this chosen infant,
Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him.
Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine,
His honor and the greatness of his name
Shall be, and make new nations. He shall flourish,
And like a mountain cedar reach his branches
To all the plains about him. Our children's children
Shall see this and bless heaven.

KING  Thou speakest wonders.

CRANMER
She shall be to the happiness of England
An aged princess; many days shall see her,
And yet no day without a deed to crown it.
Would I had known no more! But she must die,
She must, the saints must have her; yet a virgin,
A most unspotted lily, shall she pass
To th' ground, and all the world shall mourn her.

KING  O lord
Archbishop,
Thou hast made me now a man. Never before
This happy child did I get anything.
This oracle of comfort has so pleased me
That when I am in heaven I shall desire
To see what this child does and praise my Maker.--
I thank you all.--To you, my good lord mayor
And you, good brethren, I am much beholding.
I have received much honor by your presence,
And you shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords.
You must all see the Queen, and she must thank you;
She will be sick else. This day, no man think
'Has business at his house, for all shall stay.
This little one shall make it holiday.
[They exit.]


[Enter Epilogue.]


EPILOGUE
'Tis ten to one this play can never please
All that are here. Some come to take their ease
And sleep an act or two--but those, we fear,
We've frighted with our trumpets; so, 'tis clear,
They'll say 'tis naught--others, to hear the city
Abused extremely and to cry "That's witty!"--
Which we have not done neither--that I fear
All the expected good we're like to hear
For this play at this time is only in
The merciful construction of good women,
For such a one we showed 'em. If they smile
And say 'twill do, I know within a while
All the best men are ours; for 'tis ill hap
If they hold when their ladies bid 'em clap.
[He exits.]

Hamlet
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/hamlet/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
THE GHOST
HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude
QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius
KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet
OPHELIA
LAERTES, her brother
POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius
REYNALDO, servant to Polonius
HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant
Courtiers at the Danish court:
  VOLTEMAND
  CORNELIUS
  ROSENCRANTZ
  GUILDENSTERN
  OSRIC
  Gentlemen
  A Lord
Danish soldiers:
  FRANCISCO
  BARNARDO
  MARCELLUS
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway
A Captain in Fortinbras's army
Ambassadors to Denmark from England
Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>
Two Messengers
Sailors
Gravedigger
Gravedigger's companion
Doctor of Divinity
Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]


BARNARDO  Who's there?

FRANCISCO
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

BARNARDO  Long live the King!

FRANCISCO  Barnardo.

BARNARDO  He.

FRANCISCO
You come most carefully upon your hour.

BARNARDO
'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

FRANCISCO
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.

BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?

FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.

BARNARDO  Well, good night.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]


FRANCISCO
I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?

HORATIO  Friends to this ground.

MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.

FRANCISCO  Give you good night.

MARCELLUS
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
you?

FRANCISCO
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
[Francisco exits.]

MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.

BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?

HORATIO  A piece of him.

BARNARDO
Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.

HORATIO
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?

BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.

MARCELLUS
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That, if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.

HORATIO
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.

BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we have two nights seen.

HORATIO  Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

BARNARDO  Last night of all,
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one--

[Enter Ghost.]


MARCELLUS
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.

BARNARDO
In the same figure like the King that's dead.

MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.

BARNARDO
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

HORATIO
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

BARNARDO
It would be spoke to.

MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.

HORATIO
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
speak.

MARCELLUS
It is offended.

BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.

HORATIO
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
[Ghost exits.]

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.

BARNARDO
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on 't?

HORATIO
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.

MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?

HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.
Such was the very armor he had on
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
'Tis strange.

MARCELLUS
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

HORATIO
In what particular thought to work I know not,
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

MARCELLUS
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Who is 't that can inform me?

HORATIO  That can I.
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Against the which a moiety competent
Was gaged by our king, which had returned
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
And carriage of the article designed,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
For food and diet to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other
(As it doth well appear unto our state)
But to recover of us, by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.

BARNARDO
I think it be no other but e'en so.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armed through our watch so like the king
That was and is the question of these wars.

HORATIO
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of feared events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Unto our climatures and countrymen.

[Enter Ghost.]

But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!
[It spreads his arms.]
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
Speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
O, speak!
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]
Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.

MARCELLUS
Shall I strike it with my partisan?

HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.

BARNARDO  'Tis here.

HORATIO  'Tis here.
[Ghost exits.]

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.

BARNARDO
It was about to speak when the cock crew.

HORATIO
And then it started like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine, and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.

MARCELLUS
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.

HORATIO
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

MARCELLUS
Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most convenient.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Cornelius.]


KING
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
To our most valiant brother--so much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King more than the scope
Of these dilated articles allow.
[Giving them a paper.]
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.

CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND
In that and all things will we show our duty.

KING
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

LAERTES  My dread lord,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

KING
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?

POLONIUS
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laborsome petition, and at last
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.

KING
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--

HAMLET, [aside]
A little more than kin and less than kind.

KING
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

HAMLET
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.

QUEEN
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.

HAMLET
Ay, madam, it is common.

QUEEN  If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?

HAMLET
"Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"
For they are actions that a man might play;
But I have that within which passes show,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

KING
'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father.
But you must know your father lost a father,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschooled.
For what we know must be and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died today,
"This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth
This unprevailing woe and think of us
As of a father; for let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire,
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

QUEEN
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.

HAMLET
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

KING
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
[Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]

HAMLET
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
(Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she followed my poor father's body,
Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she
(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
uncle,
My father's brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

[Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]


HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.

HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.
Horatio--or I do forget myself!

HORATIO
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.

HAMLET
Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
Marcellus?

MARCELLUS  My good lord.

HAMLET
I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good
even, sir.--
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

HORATIO
A truant disposition, good my lord.

HAMLET
I would not hear your enemy say so,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

HORATIO
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

HAMLET
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

HORATIO
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.

HAMLET
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father--methinks I see my father.

HORATIO
Where, my lord?

HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.

HORATIO
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.

HAMLET
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.

HORATIO
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

HAMLET  Saw who?

HORATIO
My lord, the King your father.

HAMLET  The King my father?

HORATIO
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
This marvel to you.

HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!

HORATIO
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,
Appears before them and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
These hands are not more like.

HAMLET  But where was this?

MARCELLUS
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

HAMLET
Did you not speak to it?

HORATIO  My lord, I did,
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
It lifted up its head and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And vanished from our sight.

HAMLET  'Tis very strange.

HORATIO
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.

HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch tonight?

ALL  We do, my lord.

HAMLET
Armed, say you?

ALL  Armed, my lord.

HAMLET  From top to toe?

ALL  My lord, from head to foot.

HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?

HORATIO
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?

HORATIO
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

HAMLET  Pale or red?

HORATIO
Nay, very pale.

HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?

HORATIO
Most constantly.

HAMLET  I would I had been there.

HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.

HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?

HORATIO
While one with moderate haste might tell a
hundred.

BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.

HORATIO
Not when I saw 't.

HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?

HORATIO
It was as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silvered.

HAMLET  I will watch tonight.
Perchance 'twill walk again.

HORATIO  I warrant it will.

HAMLET
If it assume my noble father's person,
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
I'll visit you.

ALL  Our duty to your Honor.

HAMLET
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
eyes.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]


LAERTES
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.

OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?

LAERTES
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
No more.

OPHELIA  No more but so?

LAERTES  Think it no more.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
For he himself is subject to his birth.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
The safety and the health of this whole state.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
If with too credent ear you list his songs
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
To his unmastered importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

OPHELIA
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
And recks not his own rede.

LAERTES  O, fear me not.

[Enter Polonius.]

I stay too long. But here my father comes.
A double blessing is a double grace.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

POLONIUS
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
thee.
And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.

LAERTES
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

POLONIUS
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.

LAERTES
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.

OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]

POLONIUS
What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

OPHELIA
So please you, something touching the Lord
Hamlet.

POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.
'Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Have of your audience been most free and
bounteous.
If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.

OPHELIA
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Of his affection to me.

POLONIUS
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?

OPHELIA
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

POLONIUS
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.

OPHELIA
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
In honorable fashion--

POLONIUS
Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!

OPHELIA
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.

POLONIUS
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.

OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]


HAMLET
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

HORATIO
It is a nipping and an eager air.

HAMLET  What hour now?

HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.

MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.

HORATIO
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
[A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]
What does this mean, my lord?

HAMLET
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge.

HORATIO  Is it a custom?

HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,
But, to my mind, though I am native here
And to the manner born, it is a custom
More honored in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
From our achievements, though performed at
height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So oft it chances in particular men
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion
(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
The form of plausive manners--that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being nature's livery or fortune's star,
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo,
Shall in the general censure take corruption
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
To his own scandal.

[Enter Ghost.]


HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.

HAMLET
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
hell,
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"
"King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
[Ghost beckons.]

HORATIO
It beckons you to go away with it
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.

MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removed ground.
But do not go with it.

HORATIO  No, by no means.

HAMLET
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.

HORATIO
Do not, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pin's fee.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.

HORATIO
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
And hears it roar beneath.

HAMLET
It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.

MARCELLUS
You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]

HAMLET  Hold off your hands.

HORATIO
Be ruled. You shall not go.

HAMLET  My fate cries out
And makes each petty arture in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.
[Ghost and Hamlet exit.]

HORATIO
He waxes desperate with imagination.

MARCELLUS
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.

HORATIO
Have after. To what issue will this come?

MARCELLUS
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

HORATIO
Heaven will direct it.

MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]


HAMLET
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no
further.

GHOST
Mark me.

HAMLET  I will.

GHOST  My hour is almost come
When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself.

HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!

GHOST
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.

HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.

GHOST
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

HAMLET  What?

GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
And for the day confined to fast in fires
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
spheres,
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--

HAMLET  O God!

GHOST
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

HAMLET  Murder?

GHOST
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.

HAMLET
Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
May sweep to my revenge.

GHOST  I find thee apt;
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Now wears his crown.

HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!

GHOST
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
To those of mine.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage.
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial
And in the porches of my ears did pour
The leprous distilment, whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head.
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]

HAMLET
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Yea, from the table of my memory
I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
That youth and observation copied there,
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
My tables--meet it is I set it down
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
[He writes.]
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."
I have sworn 't.

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]


HORATIO  My lord, my lord!

MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.

HORATIO  Heavens secure him!

HAMLET  So be it.

MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!

HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!

MARCELLUS
How is 't, my noble lord?

HORATIO  What news, my lord?

HAMLET  O, wonderful!

HORATIO
Good my lord, tell it.

HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.

HORATIO
Not I, my lord, by heaven.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.

HAMLET
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
it?
But you'll be secret?

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.

HAMLET
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he's an arrant knave.

HORATIO
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
To tell us this.

HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
You, as your business and desire shall point you
(For every man hath business and desire,
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
I will go pray.

HORATIO
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

HAMLET
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Yes, faith, heartily.

HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.

HAMLET
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.

HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.

HAMLET
Never make known what you have seen tonight.

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.

HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.

HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.

HAMLET
Upon my sword.

MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.

HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.

HAMLET
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
truepenny?
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.

HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.

HAMLET
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Swear by my sword.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

HAMLET
Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Swear by my sword
Never to speak of this that you have heard.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.

HAMLET
Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

HORATIO
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

HAMLET
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an antic disposition on)
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we
would,"
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they
might,"
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
That you know aught of me--this do swear,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

HAMLET
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
That ever I was born to set it right!
Nay, come, let's go together.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]


POLONIUS
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

REYNALDO  I will, my lord.

POLONIUS
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Of his behavior.

REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.

POLONIUS
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they
keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?

REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.

POLONIUS
"And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.

REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.

POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.

REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.

POLONIUS
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him
That he is open to incontinency;
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
Of general assault.

REYNALDO  But, my good lord--

POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?

REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.

POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
sound,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
"Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country--

REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.

POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
something. Where did I leave?

REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,
or so," and "gentleman."

POLONIUS
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"
(Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you
say,
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
"I saw him enter such a house of sale"--
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

REYNALDO
My lord, I have.

POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.

REYNALDO  Good my lord.

POLONIUS
Observe his inclination in yourself.

REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.

POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.

REYNALDO  Well, my lord.

POLONIUS
Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]

[Enter Ophelia.]

How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?

OPHELIA
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!

POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?

OPHELIA
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosed out of hell
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.

POLONIUS
Mad for thy love?

OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
But truly I do fear it.

POLONIUS  What said he?

OPHELIA
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out o' doors he went without their helps
And to the last bended their light on me.

POLONIUS
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
As oft as any passions under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?

OPHELIA
No, my good lord, but as you did command
I did repel his letters and denied
His access to me.

POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
move
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern and Attendants.]


KING
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
So much from th' understanding of himself
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
That, being of so young days brought up with him
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
That, opened, lies within our remedy.

QUEEN
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am two men there is not living
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
As to expend your time with us awhile
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king's remembrance.

ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty.

GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To be commanded.

KING
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

QUEEN
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

GUILDENSTERN
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him!

QUEEN  Ay, amen!
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
with some Attendants.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully returned.

KING
Thou still hast been the father of good news.

POLONIUS
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath used to do, that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.

KING
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.

POLONIUS
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

KING
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
[Polonius exits.]
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
The head and source of all your son's distemper.

QUEEN
I doubt it is no other but the main--
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.

KING
Well, we shall sift him.

[Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Polonius.]

Welcome, my good friends.
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

VOLTEMAND
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
But, better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
fee
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
[He gives a paper.]
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down.

KING  It likes us well,
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
Most welcome home!
[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
"Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.

QUEEN  More matter with less art.

POLONIUS
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
[He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the
most beautified Ophelia--
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--

QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?

POLONIUS
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
[He reads the letter.]
	Doubt thou the stars are fire,
	   Doubt that the sun doth move,
	Doubt truth to be a liar,
	   But never doubt I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
most best, believe it. Adieu.
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.

KING  But how hath she received his love?

POLONIUS  What do you think of me?

KING
As of a man faithful and honorable.

POLONIUS
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had played the desk or table-book
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
"Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves
And all we mourn for.

KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?

QUEEN  It may be, very like.

POLONIUS
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
that)
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
When it proved otherwise?

KING  Not that I know.

POLONIUS
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Within the center.

KING  How may we try it further?

POLONIUS
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.

QUEEN  So he does indeed.

POLONIUS
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
[To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.

KING  We will try it.

[Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]


QUEEN
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
reading.

POLONIUS
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
[King and Queen exit with Attendants.]
How does my good Lord Hamlet?

HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.

POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?

HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.

POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.

HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.

POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?

HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
be one man picked out of ten thousand.

POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.

HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a
daughter?

POLONIUS  I have, my lord.

HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
friend, look to 't.

POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my
lord?

HAMLET  Words, words, words.

POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?

HAMLET  Between who?

POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
you could go backward.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is
method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

HAMLET  Into my grave?

POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
that often madness hits on, which reason and
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,
I will take my leave of you.

HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
will more willingly part withal--except my life,
except my life, except my life.

POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.

HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.

[Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]


POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.
[Polonius exits.]

GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.

HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
you both?

ROSENCRANTZ
As the indifferent children of the earth.

GUILDENSTERN
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.

HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?

ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.

HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
middle of her favors?

GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.

HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
She is a strumpet. What news?

ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's
grown honest.

HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
true. Let me question more in particular. What
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?

GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?

HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.

HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'
th' worst.

ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
so. To me, it is a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
'Tis too narrow for your mind.

HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
that I have bad dreams.

GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
the shadow of a dream.

HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.

ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.

HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
reason.

ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.

HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?

ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
speak.

GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?

HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
which your modesties have not craft enough to
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
you.

ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?

HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
love, and by what more dear a better
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
with me whether you were sent for or no.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?

HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If
you love me, hold not off.

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.

HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
how express and admirable; in action how like
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
your smiling you seem to say so.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
thoughts.

HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man
delights not me"?

ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
hither are they coming to offer you service.

HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for 't. What players are they?

ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
delight in, the tragedians of the city.

HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
means of the late innovation.

HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?

ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.

HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.

HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
players (as it is most like, if their means are
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
them exclaim against their own succession?

ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
them to controversy. There was for a while no
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
player went to cuffs in the question.

HAMLET  Is 't possible?

GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
about of brains.

HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules
and his load too.

HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
if philosophy could find it out.
[A flourish for the Players.]

GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.

HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
deceived.

GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?

HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.

HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.

HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday
morning, 'twas then indeed.

POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.

HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
was an actor in Rome--

POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.

HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.

POLONIUS  Upon my honor--

HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.

POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
these are the only men.

HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
hadst thou!

POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	One fair daughter, and no more,
	The which he loved passing well.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.

HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?

POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a
daughter that I love passing well.

HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.

POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	As by lot, God wot
and then, you know,
	It came to pass, as most like it was--
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
more, for look where my abridgment comes.

[Enter the Players.]

You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,
my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.

FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?

HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
'twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
received it, and others whose judgments in such
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
the author of affection, but called it an honest
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I
chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
this line--let me see, let me see:
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
'tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
So, proceed you.

POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
accent and good discretion.

FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
In general synod take away her power,
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
As low as to the fiends!

POLONIUS  This is too long.

HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

FIRST PLAYER
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--

HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?

POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.

FIRST PLAYER
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
pronounced.
But if the gods themselves did see her then
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
And passion in the gods.

POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and
has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.

HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of
this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad
epitaph than their ill report while you live.

POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
desert.

HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every
man after his desert and who shall 'scape
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
your bounty. Take them in.

POLONIUS  Come, sirs.

HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play
tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,
could you not?

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you
mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,
I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.

HAMLET
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Now I am alone.
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
For Hecuba!
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
Upon whose property and most dear life
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
I should have fatted all the region kites
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
villain!
O vengeance!
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Been struck so to the soul that presently
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Play something like the murder of my father
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
More relative than this. The play's the thing
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Guildenstern, and Lords.]


KING
And can you by no drift of conference
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

ROSENCRANTZ
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.

GUILDENSTERN
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.

QUEEN  Did he receive you well?

ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.

GUILDENSTERN
But with much forcing of his disposition.

ROSENCRANTZ
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.

QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?

ROSENCRANTZ
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
And, as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him.

POLONIUS  'Tis most true,
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.

KING
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclined.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And drive his purpose into these delights.

ROSENCRANTZ
We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
and Lords exit.]

KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.

QUEEN  I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honors.

OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
[Queen exits.]

POLONIUS
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this
book,
That show of such an exercise may color
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
('Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage
And pious action we do sugar o'er
The devil himself.

KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
conscience.
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burden!

POLONIUS
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
[They withdraw.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
To be or not to be--that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remembered.

OPHELIA  Good my lord,
How does your Honor for this many a day?

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.

OPHELIA
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
That I have longed long to redeliver.
I pray you now receive them.

HAMLET
No, not I. I never gave you aught.

OPHELIA
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
lost,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.

HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?

OPHELIA  My lord?

HAMLET  Are you fair?

OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?

HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
should admit no discourse to your beauty.

OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
than with honesty?

HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.

OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
relish of it. I loved you not.

OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.

HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Where's your father?

OPHELIA  At home, my lord.

HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.

OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!

HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
quickly too. Farewell.

OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!

HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no
more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]

OPHELIA
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
sword,
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

KING, [advancing with Polonius]
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?

POLONIUS
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him, or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.

KING  It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]


HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.

PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.

HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
word, the word to the action, with this special
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
own image, and the very age and body of the time
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
bellowed that I have thought some of nature's
journeymen had made men, and not made them
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
with us, sir.

HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
them, for there be of them that will themselves
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
question of the play be then to be considered.
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
[Players exit.]

[Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]

How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
work?

POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.

HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]
Will you two help to hasten them?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]

HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!

[Enter Horatio.]


HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.

HAMLET
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
As e'er my conversation coped withal.

HORATIO
O, my dear lord--

HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
flattered?
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well
commeddled
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
There is a play tonight before the King.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And, after, we will both our judgments join
In censure of his seeming.

HORATIO  Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
[Sound a flourish.]

HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Get you a place.

[Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
torches.]


KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?

HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
capons so.

KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
words are not mine.

HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you
played once i' th' university, you say?

POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
good actor.

HAMLET  What did you enact?

POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'
Capitol. Brutus killed me.

HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
calf there.--Be the players ready?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
patience.

QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more
attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]

POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?

HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

OPHELIA  No, my lord.

HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?

OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.

HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'
legs.

OPHELIA  What is, my lord?

HAMLET  Nothing.

OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.

HAMLET  Who, I?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
my mother looks, and my father died within 's two
hours.

OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.

HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the
hobby-horse is forgot."
[The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]

[Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
awhile but in the end accepts his love.]
[Players exit.]

OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?

HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
mischief.

OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
play.

[Enter Prologue.]


HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.

OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?

HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you
what it means.

OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the
play.

PROLOGUE
	For us and for our tragedy,
	Here stooping to your clemency,
	We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]

HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?

OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.

HAMLET  As woman's love.

[Enter the Player King and Queen.]


PLAYER KING
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

PLAYER QUEEN
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

PLAYER KING
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
And thou shall live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou--

PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accurst.
None wed the second but who killed the first.

HAMLET  That's wormwood!

PLAYER QUEEN
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead
When second husband kisses me in bed.

PLAYER KING
I do believe you think what now you speak,
But what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
Directly seasons him his enemy.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown;
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

PLAYER QUEEN
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.

HAMLET  If she should break it now!

PLAYER KING
'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]

PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.
[Player Queen exits.]

HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?

QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.

HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.

KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
offense in 't?

HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
offense i' th' world.

KING  What do you call the play?

HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
our withers are unwrung.

[Enter Lucianus.]

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.

OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.

HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
if I could see the puppets dallying.

OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
edge.

OPHELIA  Still better and worse.

HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
revenge.

LUCIANUS
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
[Pours the poison in his ears.]

HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His
name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
[Claudius rises.]

OPHELIA  The King rises.

HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?

QUEEN  How fares my lord?

POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.

KING  Give me some light. Away!

POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
[All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]

HAMLET
	Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
	   The hart ungalled play.
	For some must watch, while some must sleep:
	   Thus runs the world away.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
fellowship in a cry of players?

HORATIO  Half a share.

HAMLET  A whole one, I.
	For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
	   This realm dismantled was
	Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
	   A very very--pajock.

HORATIO  You might have rhymed.

HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?

HORATIO  Very well, my lord.

HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?

HORATIO  I did very well note him.

HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
recorders!
	For if the King like not the comedy,
	Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Come, some music!

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]


GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
with you.

HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.

GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--

HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?

GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
distempered.

HAMLET  With drink, sir?

GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.

HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
choler.

GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
some frame and start not so wildly from my
affair.

HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.

GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.

HAMLET  You are welcome.

GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
shall be the end of my business.

HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.

ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?

HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
you say--

ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
struck her into amazement and admiration.

HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
mother's admiration? Impart.

ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
closet ere you go to bed.

HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
Have you any further trade with us?

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.

HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.

HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.

ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
voice of the King himself for your succession in
Denmark?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the
proverb is something musty.

[Enter the Players with recorders.]

O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a
recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?

GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
love is too unmannerly.

HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
upon this pipe?

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.

HAMLET  I pray you.

GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.

HAMLET  I do beseech you.

GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.

HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
music. Look you, these are the stops.

GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.

HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
fret me, you cannot play upon me.

[Enter Polonius.]

God bless you, sir.

POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
and presently.

HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in
shape of a camel?

POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.

HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.

POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.

HAMLET  Or like a whale.

POLONIUS  Very like a whale.

HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
[Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will
come by and by.

POLONIUS  I will say so.

HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,
friends.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
'Tis now the very witching time of night,
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
blood
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]


KING
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
Out of his brows.

GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.

ROSENCRANTZ
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armor of the mind
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

KING
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.

ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
home;
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
And tell you what I know.

KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
[Polonius exits.]
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
All may be well.	[He kneels.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]
And so he goes to heaven,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
A villain kills my father, and for that,
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
To heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
But in our circumstance and course of thought
'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
[He sheathes his sword.]
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
[Hamlet exits.]

KING, [rising]
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Queen and Polonius.]


POLONIUS
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
with
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
between
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Pray you, be round with him.

HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!

QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
I hear him coming.
[Polonius hides behind the arras.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?

QUEEN
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

HAMLET
Mother, you have my father much offended.

QUEEN
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

HAMLET
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

QUEEN
Why, how now, Hamlet?

HAMLET  What's the matter now?

QUEEN
Have you forgot me?

HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.

QUEEN
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.

HAMLET
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.

QUEEN
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, ho!

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!

HAMLET
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
[He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
through the arras.]

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]
O, I am slain!

QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?

QUEEN
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

HAMLET
A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.

QUEEN
As kill a king?

HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
[He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
[To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
you down,
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damned custom have not brazed it so
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.

QUEEN
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me?

HAMLET  Such an act
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow
O'er this solidity and compound mass
With heated visage, as against the doom,
Is thought-sick at the act.

QUEEN  Ay me, what act
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?

HAMLET
Look here upon this picture and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
A station like the herald Mercury
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
A combination and a form indeed
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
You cannot call it love, for at your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
And reason panders will.

QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grained spots
As will not leave their tinct.

HAMLET  Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty!

QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
No more, sweet Hamlet!

HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
And put it in his pocket--

QUEEN  No more!

HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--

[Enter Ghost.]

Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
figure?

QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.

HAMLET
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Th' important acting of your dread command?
O, say!

GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, Hamlet.

HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?

QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?

HAMLET
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not
look upon me,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.

QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?

HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?

QUEEN
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?

QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.

HAMLET
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
[Ghost exits.]

QUEEN
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
Is very cunning in.

HAMLET  Ecstasy?
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

QUEEN
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!

HAMLET
O, throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half!
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
And either ... the devil or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
[Pointing to Polonius.]
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
To punish me with this and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him and will answer well
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
I must be cruel only to be kind.
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.

QUEEN  What shall I do?

HAMLET
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And break your own neck down.

QUEEN
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
What thou hast said to me.

HAMLET
I must to England, you know that.

QUEEN  Alack,
I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.

HAMLET
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
Good night, mother.
[They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern.]


KING
There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
Where is your son?

QUEEN
Bestow this place on us a little while.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!

KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

QUEEN
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"
And in this brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man.

KING  O heavy deed!
It had been so with us, had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all--
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We would not understand what was most fit,
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

QUEEN
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
Among a mineral of metals base,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.

KING  O Gertrude, come away!
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
We must with all our majesty and skill
Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]

Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
And let them know both what we mean to do
And what's untimely done. ...
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
As level as the cannon to his blank
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET  Safely stowed.

GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
O, here they come.

[Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]


ROSENCRANTZ
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

HAMLET
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

ROSENCRANTZ
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
And bear it to the chapel.

HAMLET  Do not believe it.

ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?

HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
replication should be made by the son of a king?

ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
shall be dry again.

ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.

HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
foolish ear.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the
body is and go with us to the King.

HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King is a thing--

GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?

HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
all after!
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King and two or three.]


KING
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him away must seem
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
By desperate appliance are relieved
Or not at all.

[Enter Rosencrantz.]

How now, what hath befallen?

ROSENCRANTZ
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
We cannot get from him.

KING  But where is he?

ROSENCRANTZ
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

KING
Bring him before us.

ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.

[They enter with Hamlet.]


KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?

HAMLET  At supper.

KING  At supper where?

HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
but variable service--two dishes but to one table.
That's the end.

KING  Alas, alas!

HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
worm.

KING  What dost thou mean by this?

HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
progress through the guts of a beggar.

KING  Where is Polonius?

HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
find him not there, seek him i' th' other
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
the stairs into the lobby.

KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.

HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]

KING
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
hence
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
For England.

HAMLET  For England?

KING  Ay, Hamlet.

HAMLET  Good.

KING
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.

HAMLET
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
England.
Farewell, dear mother.

KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.

HAMLET
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
Come, for England.	[He exits.]

KING
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.
[All but the King exit.]
And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught
(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
By letters congruing to that effect,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]


FORTINBRAS
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye;
And let him know so.

CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.

FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]

[Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]


HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?

CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.

HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?

CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.

HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?

CAPTAIN
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.

HAMLET
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Or for some frontier?

CAPTAIN
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
That hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

HAMLET
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.

CAPTAIN
Yes, it is already garrisoned.

HAMLET
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.

CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]

ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?

HAMLET
I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
How all occasions do inform against me
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
wisdom
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
[He exits.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]


QUEEN  I will not speak with her.

GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.

QUEEN  What would she have?

GENTLEMAN
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her
heart,
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
them,
Indeed would make one think there might be
thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

HORATIO
'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
strew
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]
[Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

[Enter Ophelia distracted.]


OPHELIA
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?

QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?

OPHELIA [sings]
	How should I your true love know
	   From another one?
	By his cockle hat and staff
	   And his sandal shoon.

QUEEN
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
[Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,
	   He is dead and gone;
	At his head a grass-green turf,
	   At his heels a stone.
Oh, ho!

QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--

OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.
[Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--

[Enter King.]


QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.

OPHELIA [sings]
	   Larded all with sweet flowers;
	Which bewept to the ground did not go
	   With true-love showers.

KING  How do you, pretty lady?

OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
know not what we may be. God be at your table.

KING  Conceit upon her father.

OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when
they ask you what it means, say you this:
[Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,
	   All in the morning betime,
	And I a maid at your window,
	   To be your Valentine.
	Then up he rose and donned his clothes
	   And dupped the chamber door,
	Let in the maid, that out a maid
	   Never departed more.

KING  Pretty Ophelia--

OPHELIA
Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:
[Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,
	   Alack and fie for shame,
	Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;
	   By Cock, they are to blame.
	Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,
	   You promised me to wed."
He answers:
	"So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,
	   An thou hadst not come to my bed."

KING  How long hath she been thus?

OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]

KING
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
[Horatio exits.]
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
All from her father's death, and now behold!
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
whispers
For good Polonius' death, and we have done but
greenly
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
Gives me superfluous death.
[A noise within.]

QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?

KING  Attend!
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

[Enter a Messenger.]

What is the matter?

MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"
And, as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
"Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"
[A noise within.]

QUEEN
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!

KING  The doors are broke.

[Enter Laertes with others.
]

LAERTES
Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.

ALL  No, let's come in!

LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.

ALL  We will, we will.

LAERTES
I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou
vile king,
Give me my father!

QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.

LAERTES
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me
bastard,
Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Of my true mother.

KING  What is the cause, Laertes,
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,
Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,
Gertrude.--
Speak, man.

LAERTES  Where is my father?

KING  Dead.

QUEEN
But not by him.

KING  Let him demand his fill.

LAERTES
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Most throughly for my father.

KING  Who shall stay you?

LAERTES  My will, not all the world.
And for my means, I'll husband them so well
They shall go far with little.

KING  Good Laertes,
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
foe,
Winner and loser?

LAERTES  None but his enemies.

KING  Will you know them, then?

LAERTES
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
Repast them with my blood.

KING  Why, now you speak
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your father's death
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
As day does to your eye.

  [A noise within:] "Let her come in!"

LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?

[Enter Ophelia.]

O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of itself
After the thing it loves.

OPHELIA [sings]
	They bore him barefaced on the bier,
	Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
	And in his grave rained many a tear.
Fare you well, my dove.

LAERTES
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
It could not move thus.

OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you
"Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes
it! It is the false steward that stole his master's
daughter.

LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.

OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
that's for thoughts.

LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
fitted.

OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.
There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we
may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear
your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would
give you some violets, but they withered all when
my father died. They say he made a good end.
[Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

LAERTES
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
She turns to favor and to prettiness.

OPHELIA [sings]
	And will he not come again?
	And will he not come again?
	   No, no, he is dead.
	   Go to thy deathbed.
	He never will come again.

	His beard was as white as snow,
	All flaxen was his poll.
	   He is gone, he is gone,
	   And we cast away moan.
	God 'a mercy on his soul.
And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'
you.	[She exits.]

LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?

KING
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
To give it due content.

LAERTES  Let this be so.
His means of death, his obscure funeral
(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
That I must call 't in question.

KING  So you shall,
And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.
I pray you, go with me.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Horatio and others.]


HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?

GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
letters for you.

HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not
know from what part of the world I should be
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

[Enter Sailors.]


SAILOR  God bless you, sir.

HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.

SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter
for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was
bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I
am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]

HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
hold their course for England; of them I have
much to tell thee. Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
And do 't the speedier that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter King and Laertes.]


KING
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain
Pursued my life.

LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So criminal and so capital in nature,
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirred up.

KING  O, for two special reasons,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
I could not but by her. The other motive
Why to a public count I might not go
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
But not where I have aimed them.

LAERTES
And so have I a noble father lost,
A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.

KING
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--

[Enter a Messenger with letters.]

How now? What news?

MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from
Hamlet.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.

KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?

MESSENGER
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
Of him that brought them.

KING  Laertes, you shall hear
them.--
Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]
[Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
and more strange return. Hamlet.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?

LAERTES  Know you the hand?

KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--
And in a postscript here, he says "alone."
Can you advise me?

LAERTES
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
It warms the very sickness in my heart
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
"Thus didst thou."

KING  If it be so, Laertes
(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
Will you be ruled by me?

LAERTES  Ay, my lord,
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.

KING
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it, I will work him
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
And call it accident.

LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,
The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.

KING  It falls right.
You have been talked of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Did not together pluck such envy from him
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
Of the unworthiest siege.

LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?

KING
A very ribbon in the cap of youth--
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
The light and careless livery that it wears
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
Come short of what he did.

LAERTES  A Norman was 't?

KING  A Norman.

LAERTES
Upon my life, Lamord.

KING  The very same.

LAERTES
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
And gem of all the nation.

KING  He made confession of you
And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defense,
And for your rapier most especial,
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their
nation
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.
Now out of this--

LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?

KING
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?

LAERTES  Why ask you this?

KING
Not that I think you did not love your father,
But that I know love is begun by time
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
We should do when we would; for this "would"
changes
And hath abatements and delays as many
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
To show yourself indeed your father's son
More than in words?

LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.

KING
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
together
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Requite him for your father.

LAERTES  I will do 't,
And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
I bought an unction of a mountebank
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.

KING  Let's further think of this,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad
performance,
'Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Should have a back or second that might hold
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--
I ha 't!
When in your motion you are hot and dry
(As make your bouts more violent to that end)
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared
him
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what
noise?

[Enter Queen.]


QUEEN
One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.

LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?

QUEEN
There is a willow grows askant the brook
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call
them.
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
As one incapable of her own distress
Or like a creature native and endued
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
To muddy death.

LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.

QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.

LAERTES
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.
I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,
But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]

KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Therefore, let's follow.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Gravedigger and Another.]


GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?

OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
Christian burial.

GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned
herself in her own defense?

OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.

GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
drowned herself wittingly.

OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--

GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
own life.

OTHER  But is this law?

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.

OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
Christian burial.

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more
pity that great folk should have count'nance in this
world to drown or hang themselves more than
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and
grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.

OTHER  Was he a gentleman?

GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.

OTHER  Why, he had none.

GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
purpose, confess thyself--

OTHER  Go to!

GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
thousand tenants.

GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.

OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
or a carpenter?"

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.

GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.

OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.

[Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]


GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
beating. And, when you are asked this question
next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
stoup of liquor.
[The Other Man exits
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]
	In youth when I did love, did love,
	   Methought it was very sweet
	To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,
	   O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.

HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
sings in grave-making.

HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of
easiness.

HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment
hath the daintier sense.

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
	But age with his stealing steps
	Hath clawed me in his clutch,
	And hath shipped me into the land,
	As if I had never been such.
[He digs up a skull.]

HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
'twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
might it not?

HORATIO  It might, my lord.

HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
might it not?

HORATIO  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had
the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
ache to think on 't.

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
	A pickax and a spade, a spade,
	For and a shrouding sheet,
	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.
[He digs up more skulls.]

HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?

HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.

HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.

HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--
Whose grave's this, sirrah?

GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.
[Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.

HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.

GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is
mine.

HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.
'Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
liest.

GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again
from me to you.

HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?

GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.

HAMLET  What woman then?

GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.

HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?

GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
her soul, she's dead.

HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been
grave-maker?

GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
Fortinbras.

HAMLET  How long is that since?

GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.

HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great
matter there.

HAMLET  Why?

GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There
the men are as mad as he.

HAMLET  How came he mad?

GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.

HAMLET  How "strangely"?

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.

HAMLET  Upon what ground?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.

HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
year.

HAMLET  Why he more than another?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth
three-and-twenty years.

HAMLET  Whose was it?

GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.
Whose do you think it was?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not.

GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the
King's jester.

HAMLET  This?

GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.

HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

HORATIO  What's that, my lord?

HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this
fashion i' th' earth?

HORATIO  E'en so.

HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]

HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.

HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?

HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider
so.

HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!

[Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]

But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

DOCTOR
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
her.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of bell and burial.

LAERTES
Must there no more be done?

DOCTOR  No more be done.
We should profane the service of the dead
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
As to peace-parted souls.

LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
When thou liest howling.

HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?

QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
[She scatters flowers.]
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
And not have strewed thy grave.

LAERTES  O, treble woe
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
[Leaps in the grave.]
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
Of blue Olympus.

HAMLET, [advancing]
What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.

LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]
The devil take thy soul!

HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.

KING  Pluck them asunder.

QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!

ALL  Gentlemen!

HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.
[Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]

HAMLET
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!

QUEEN  O my son, what theme?

HAMLET
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Could not with all their quantity of love
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!

QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.

HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
thyself,
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
I'll rant as well as thou.

QUEEN  This is mere madness;
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
His silence will sit drooping.

HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
[Hamlet exits.]

KING
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
[Horatio exits.]
[To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last
night's speech.
We'll put the matter to the present push.--
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--
This grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]


HAMLET
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
You do remember all the circumstance?

HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!

HAMLET
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
And praised be rashness for it: let us know,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
us
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will--

HORATIO  That is most
certain.

HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold
(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
A royal knavery--an exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
My head should be struck off.

HORATIO  Is 't possible?

HAMLET
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
[Handing him a paper.]
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?

HORATIO  I beseech you.

HAMLET
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Th' effect of what I wrote?

HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.

HAMLET
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed.

HORATIO  How was this sealed?

HAMLET
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
safely,
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Thou knowest already.

HORATIO
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.

HAMLET
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites.

HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!

HAMLET
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
conscience
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
damned
To let this canker of our nature come
In further evil?

HORATIO
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.

HAMLET
It will be short. The interim's mine,
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow'ring passion.

HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?

[Enter Osric, a courtier.]


OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to
Denmark.

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]
Dost know this waterfly?

HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.

HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,
for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.

HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the
head.

OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.

HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
northerly.

OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
my complexion.

OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
'twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
on your head. Sir, this is the matter--

HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to
Osric to put on his hat.]

OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
continent of what part a gentleman would see.

HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
nothing more.

OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
gentleman in our more rawer breath?

OSRIC  Sir?

HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another
tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.

HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of
this gentleman?

OSRIC  Of Laertes?

HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words
are spent.

HAMLET  Of him, sir.

OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--

HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
would not much approve me. Well, sir?

OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
is--

HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
were to know himself.

OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
laid on him by them, in his meed he's
unfellowed.

HAMLET  What's his weapon?

OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.

HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
of very liberal conceit.

HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?

HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent
ere you had done.

OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--
that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
all "impawned," as you call it?

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.

HAMLET  How if I answer no?

OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
in trial.

HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
hits.

OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?

HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
nature will.

OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.

HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend
it himself. There are no tongues else for 's
turn.

HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head.

HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
them through and through the most fanned
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
their trial, the bubbles are out.

[Enter a Lord.]


LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
take longer time.

HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
now.

LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.

HAMLET  In happy time.

LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]

HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.

HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
about my heart. But it is no matter.

HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--

HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.

HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.

HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.

[A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]


KING
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
[He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]

HAMLET, [to Laertes]
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
knows,
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
With a sore distraction. What I have done
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Sir, in this audience
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
And hurt my brother.

LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
Till by some elder masters of known honor
I have a voice and precedent of peace
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
I do receive your offered love like love
And will not wrong it.

HAMLET  I embrace it freely
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
Give us the foils. Come on.

LAERTES  Come, one for me.

HAMLET
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.

LAERTES  You mock me, sir.

HAMLET  No, by this hand.

KING
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
You know the wager?

HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.

KING
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.

LAERTES
This is too heavy. Let me see another.

HAMLET
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.
[Prepare to play.]

KING
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
Richer than that which four successive kings
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
"Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
[Trumpets the while.]

HAMLET  Come on, sir.

LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]

HAMLET  One.

LAERTES  No.

HAMLET  Judgment!

OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.

LAERTES  Well, again.

KING
Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
Here's to thy health.
[He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]
[Drum, trumpets, and shot.]
Give him the cup.

HAMLET
I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?

LAERTES
A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.

KING
Our son shall win.

QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
[She lifts the cup.]

HAMLET  Good madam.

KING  Gertrude, do not drink.

QUEEN
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]

KING, [aside]
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.

HAMLET
I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.

QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.

LAERTES, [to Claudius]
My lord, I'll hit him now.

KING  I do not think 't.

LAERTES, [aside]
And yet it is almost against my conscience.

HAMLET
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]

OSRIC  Nothing neither way.

LAERTES  Have at you now!
[Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]

KING  Part them. They are incensed.

HAMLET  Nay, come again.
[The Queen falls.]

OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!

HORATIO
They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?

OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?

LAERTES
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
[He falls.]
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.

HAMLET
How does the Queen?

KING  She swoons to see them bleed.

QUEEN
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]

HAMLET
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]
Treachery! Seek it out.

LAERTES
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
No med'cine in the world can do thee good.
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.
I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.

HAMLET
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
work.	[Hurts the King.]

ALL  Treason, treason!

KING
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.

HAMLET
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
[Forcing him to drink the poison.]
Follow my mother.	[King dies.]

LAERTES  He is justly served.
It is a poison tempered by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]

HAMLET
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.

HORATIO  Never believe it.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]

HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
me!
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story.
[A march afar off and shot within.]
What warlike noise is this?

[Enter Osric.]


OSRIC
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
To th' ambassadors of England gives
This warlike volley.

HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
But I do prophesy th' election lights
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]

HORATIO
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
[March within.]
Why does the drum come hither?

[Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]


FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?

HORATIO  What is it you would see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

FORTINBRAS
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
That thou so many princes at a shot
So bloodily hast struck?

AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,
And our affairs from England come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?

HORATIO  Not from his
mouth,
Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.

FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it
And call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

HORATIO
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
more.
But let this same be presently performed
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more
mischance
On plots and errors happen.

FORTINBRAS  Let four captains
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
The soldier's music and the rite of war
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
[They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
ordnance are shot off.]



